CHAPTER 1
An Aristocratic Orphan
The Development of a Buddhist Prodigy
Traditional records depict Dogen as a prodigy bom into an
elite family at the beginning of the thirteenth century. Upon his
mother’s death when he was seven, while looking at the smoke
drifting from the burning incense during her funeral, Dogen found
himself deeply moved by an awareness of transiency. At the age of
twelve, he relinquished the chance offered by an adoptive father to
be trained in court society, opting instead to take the tonsure and
become ordained as a Tendai monk. This he did on Mount Hiei,
which was then the primary destination for all Buddhist seekers
from Kyoto and beyond. Once he joined the Tendai community,
however, he quickly faced a grave sense of doubt about original­
enlightenment thought—one of the main tenets of Tendai teach­
ing and a dominant force in Japanese Buddhism. In particular, he
questioned its relevance for coming to terms with the vicissitudes of
ephemeral existence that he faced as an orphan raised in an unsettled
period of Japanese history. He endured a great doubt (taigi), feeling
wary and unsettled regarding this key aspect of Mahayana Buddhist
teaching. This occurred during an era when the need for pathways
to individual salvation was being promoted by various new forms
of Japanese Buddhism that sought to address widespread personal
feelings of fragility, instability, and loss.
39

4° LIFE AND THOUGHT
This chapter examines the first of the four main periods in
Dogen’s life, the formative period (1200-1213), which is divided
into two substages of uneven length. The first phase (1200-1212)
covers Dogen’s early education, sense of despair, and initiation.
The brief second phase (1213) involves the pivotal year in which
he became disillusioned by uncertainty before leaving Mount Hiei
and soon after began discovering the Zen approach to meditation
recently introduced to Japan by Eisai.
Dogen’s Birth and Early Childhood
According to the traditional narrative, Dogen was born on the sec­
ond day of the first lunar month of the year 1200. His birthday is
now celebrated on January 26, following the modern solar calendar.
As indicated in the lineage map on page 43, he had direct ties to the
three most prestigious clans in the empire:
■ The imperial (Yamato) line, through the legacy of Emperor
Murakami, who reigned during the mid-goos. The impe­
rial lineage had dominated the entire Heian period but lost
power by the end of the twelfth century.
• The Minamoto (Genji) clan, through his father, which was
derivative of the royal family. The Minamoto members were
temporarily ascendant but in stiff competition with, and
soon to lose out to, other samurai clans for leadership of the
early Kamakura period.
• The Fujiwara clan, through his mother, which had long sup­
ported and in many ways eclipsed imperial rule through a
system of endogamy. The Fujiwaras also entered into decline,
although their prestigious members continued to maintain
considerable influence that was still being exerted in the
capital.

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 41
Despite their prominence and power, each of these families was
facing a challenging situation based on far-reaching sociopolitical
changes. Indeed, Dogen was born into a crucial turning point in
Japanese cultural history.
Dogen’s father was Michichika, a general and chancellor of the
court who hailed from the Minamoto clan. In 1192, the clan had
wrested the power of the government from the Fujiwara-backed
regency. Through his father’s lineage, it is claimed that Dogen was
also a ninth-generation descendant of Murakami, who reigned for
two decades (946-967) in the tenth century. Thus, he was distantly
related to the current sovereign, Go Fukakusa, for whom, many
years later while serving as a temple abbot, he occasionally said
prayers during sermons. When Michichika died in 1202 at the age
of fifty-four, Dogen’s foster father became Michitomo Minamoto—
supposedly an uncle, though he may have been the son of his father
and therefore Dogen’s considerably older half brother. In later years,
Dogen only acknowledged Michitomo, rather than Michichika, in a
couple of memorial sermons. This has led to speculation that Mich­
itomo was the true father, but perhaps Dogen simply remembered
him more fondly since he knew him while growing up.
Ishi, Dogen’s mother, was the offspring of Fujiwara Motofusa.
Motofusa had apparently arranged for his daughter, celebrated for
her beauty, to be wedded to the much older Michichika as a des­
perate attempt to regain prestige. He had failed in previous efforts
to broker a power-based marriage for her because of the family’s
decline. Shortly after Dogen’s birth, a physiognomist, customarily
brought along by aristocrats as a fortune-teller, looked at his face
and said to Ishi, “This son is a sagely child whose eyes have double
pupils. He definitely is a great vessel for truth. Ancient prophecies
indicate that the birth of such a child endangers the life of the
mother. When this child is in his sixth or seventh year, you will surely
die.”54 It is said that Ishi was not upset or fearful but loved her child 

42 LIFE AND THOUGHT
all the more. With Michitomo’s support, she arranged for Dogen to
learn to read Chinese classics, including Confucian and Daoist texts,
imperial chronicles, and poetry collections, as well as important
Japanese literary works. As part of her deathbed conversation, Ishi
recalled the birth-time divination and implored Dogen to join the
monkhood when he felt mature enough to undergo a conversion.
Modem historians generally agree that Dogen’s outstanding lit­
erary skills, evident in the rhetorical style of his many writings and
in his excellent calligraphy, provide confirmation of his aristocratic
education. In addition to its contribution to Buddhist thought,
the Treasury is regarded as an exemplary work of medieval Japa­
nese literature, and extant samples of Dogen’s handwriting remain
highly valued.
By virtue of his heritage, Dogen had many powerful relatives in
Kyoto’s secular and religious circles, and they would affect some
of his career choices, one way or the other, for years to come. After
he was orphaned at age seven, relatives on both the Minamoto
and Fujiwara sides offered to adopt him and provide prospects for
worldly success. Apparently, he was taken in by Motofusa’s brother,
Fujiwara Moroie (1172-1238), who lacked an heir, although some
versions of the story claim it was Motofusa himself who raised young
Dogen. In any case, he continued to study traditional Chinese and
Japanese writings. It is said that by the age of eight he could read
through the dense Indian Buddhist philosophical compendium the
Verses on theTreasury of the Dharma (Abhidharmakosa')—a scripture that
was widely studied in Sinitic editions, whether or not the usually
elite reader was being trained for a life in the monkhood.
Buddhist Renunciation
The Fujiwara family began to prepare Dogen for an important role
in court society. In 1212 they planned to celebrate a twelfth-year

DOGEN’S LINEAGES
Network of ;
Family &
Persona! \
Relations •
FUJIWARA CLAN
Rinzai Patron
Fujiwara Motofusa Kujo Michiie
(1145-1231)
Mother's Father V
Enni Ben'en
(1202-1280)
Tofukuji Abbot
• /* generations)
DARUMA SCHOOL
Ekan
Hatano Yoshishigc
(unk.) Dogen s main
Samurai Patron
Ishi
(?-1207)
Mother V
Koga Michitomo
(1171-1227)
Foster-father V
Hojo Tokiyori
(1227-1263)
Offered Patronage
Dainichi Nonin
(?-H95)
Michichika (Minamoto)
(1149-1202)
Father V
Emperor Murakami
(946-967)
DOGEN
(1200-1253)
Founder of Soto Zen
Transmitted at
Koshoji A Eiheiji
Five Main Uncages after Dogen’s Death:® remained at Eiheiji,® returned to Kyoto,
(3) Dogcn’s main Chinese disciple, ©second major Soto branch,® based in Kyushu
I .!------------r—i Giin® Gien Gikai i
Ejo
Kakuan
TEACHERS
TENDAI--------------* RINZAK
/ Ryokan Uncle v Eisai
Mt. Hiei Priest (1141-1215)
Koen Kenninji [
(1168-1235) Myozcn i
Mt. Hiei Abbot (1184-1225) •
CHINESE
CAODONG
SCHOOL
Rujing i
(1163-!227)\
Mentor :
Koin Under(1145-1216) D^e"'°
Onjoji Abbot
CHINESE
LINJI
SCHOOL
DISCIPLES
1
2^ Eiheiji Abbot
Ejo®
j (!198-1280)
1 ..........
Scnnc® (unk.)
Yokoji (Kyoto)
1
Kakushin
(1207-1298)
4* Eiheiji Abbot 3* Eiheiji Abbot Jakucn®
Gif" .... Gikai®
(unk.) (1219-1309)
(1207-1299)
Hokyoji
IDaijoji
Gasan
(1276-1366)
Mciho
(1277-1350) J
1Kcizan Jokin
----- (1264-1325)
Sojiji & Yokoji
5* Eiheiji Abbot
Giun
(1253-1333)
The familial and Buddhist lineages that influenced and succeeded Dogen.
(Image © 2020 Maria Sol Echarren and Steven Heine.)
43

44 LIFE AND THOUGHT
capping ceremony, or confirmation of adulthood. According to
traditional Japanese counting, which refers to someone as one year
old at the time of birth, this would be performed in the thirteenth
year. That occasion was to represent the gateway to making Dogen
ready for a high-level administrative position. However, he surrep­
titiously rejected this arrangement. In the spring of that year, he
decided instead to run off and enroll at Mount Hiei. He went to
the high priest Ryokan, a maternal uncle from the Fujiwara side,
who led a small cloister in the Yokawa District. Ryokan initially
rebuffed Dogen’s request to enter the cloister. Upon inquiring
whether Dogen’s choice would fulfill his family’s wishes, Dogen
replied, “When my loving mother passed away, she made a request
by saying, ‘You should go forth from household life and become a
student of the Way.’ Therefore, I do not want to be involved in the
futility of the profane world. I want to make a home-departure so
as to repay the blessings of my grandmother, aunts, and mother.”55
Shedding tears on hearing such a powerful explanation, Ryokan
permitted Dogen to enter the abbey for his preliminary studies.
A year later he took the tonsure under Koen, the Mount Hiei
abbot. The dharma name Dogen was apparently bestowed based on
a passage in the Flower Garland Sutra (Ch. Huayan jing, Jp. Keg-
onkyo) that refers to faith as the mother of the “merit of the original
Way” (dogen kudoku) that gives rise to the essential goodness of all
beings. Shortly after this, Dogen received the forty-eight bodhisat­
tva precepts (bosatsu kairitsu) that were typical of Tendai initiation
ceremonies. By not also receiving the 250 Hinayana precepts—at
the time only being offered at temples in the former capital of Nara,
to the south of Kyoto—Dogen would eventually face a problem in
trying to enter China, where both sets of precepts were required
for all incoming monks.
The Mount Hiei induction ceremony was the first of several
ordinations Dogen underwent. He later underwent additional 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 45
ones under the auspices of Myozen, representing the Oryu (Ch.
Huanglong) lineage of the Rinzai (Ch. Linji) stream of Zen, and
under Rujing of the Soto (Ch. Caodong) lineage. Fujiwara Moto-
fusa and/or Moroie were likely upset with Dogen’s secret decision
to renounce their offer of secular success. Evidence for that includes
the fact that thirty years later Motofusa’s son, Chancellor Kujo
Michiie, supported Enni Ben’en, Dogen’s Rinzai rival. When Enni
returned in 1243 from spending six years in China, a magnificent
new temple, Tofukuji, was constructed with Fujiwara backing near
Koshoji. By eclipsing the stature of Dogen’s monastery in size and
grandeur, even though Enni’s pilgrimage took place over a decade
later, this humiliation probably contributed to Dogen’s decision to
leave Kyoto that same year.
Medieval Japanese Tendai and the
Birth of Kamakura Buddhism
At the time of Dogen’s ordination on Mount Hiei, Tendai Buddhism
had long been dominant in Japan. The school had by then been in a
hegemonic position for nearly the entirety of the four hundred years
of the Heian period (794-1185), as well as the early decades of the
Kamakura period (1185-1333). Japanese Tendai began with Saicho
(767-822), who founded the sect after he returned from studying
in China in the first decade of the 800s. Known for its esoteric rit­
ualism, Japanese Tendai greatly contributed to the establishment
of Kyoto as Japan’s capital city. Sacred Tendai rites were thought
to protect Kyoto from chaos and disturbance, and they became an
important part of the city’s thriving culture. The Tendai sect often
catered to the concerns of the nobility and in turn received substan­
tial support. Priests offered ceremonies that combined the teachings
of the Lotus Sutra (considered applicable to all humans and sentient
beings) with views about tantric symbolism and its sacramental

46 LIFE AND THOUGHT
power. The increasingly important esoteric component of Japanese
Tendai was imported from diverse practices popular on the main­
land, though not from the Chinese Tiantai school itself, which was
highly doctrinal. The Tendai approach to ritualism, with its complex
social and financial connections to the Kyoto aristocracy, could
only be enacted by the most highly trained monks, and others were
excluded from participating in these ritual performances.
With the onset of the Kamakura period, various monks began
to reject the Tendai insistence on restricting access to ritual knowl­
edge only to those who occupied an inner sanctum of the school.
Such monks even began leaving the Hiei cloisters to start their own
schools, doing so despite the challenge of needing their new sects
to be sanctioned by the state. They sought to personalize religious
experience in a way that would be open to a much broader range
of social classes. These included not only the ascendant warriors
but also peasants and outcasts, and the new ways of practice were
also more gender inclusive. For example, Dogen’s congregations
encouraged the incorporation of nuns, a practice he witnessed in
China. It seems from some of his writings that several nuns were
close to him, although they were in the end considered of a lesser
status than male monastics. The Pure Land schools included female
lay practitioners and Shinran, the founder of True Pure Land (Jodo
Shin) in the early 1200s that broke off from Honen’s Pure Land
school, even got married. All legitimate seekers, including those
who lacked the credentials to joint Mount Hiei, were suddenly
being encouraged by this newly inspired set of teachers to pur­
sue spirituality. These innovators advocated the use of training
techniques, especially sitting meditation and chanting the name of
Amida Buddha, that had been incorporated into Tendai rituals but
without having much importance. Although Tendai has remained
a viable sect to this day, it never regained the level of influence it
had during the classical period.

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 47
During Dogen’s life, several new Buddhist movements emerged
and almost instantly began to prosper. These novel sects, referred
to collectively as the New Kamakura Buddhism, emphasized the
path to individual deliverance for lower classes and marginalized
groups. Dogen’s own Soto Zen school is counted among them, as
is Rinzai Zen. Both Zen groups were based largely on transplanting
Chinese contemplative practices to Japan. They emphasized the
approach of self-power (jiriki) through combining meditation with
strict monastic regulations. This combination was approached by
virtue of understanding the universality of ultimate reality. One way
Dogen phrased this was the unity of “whole-being-buddha-nature”
(shitsuu bussho), by which he meant that oneness is considered insep­
arable from a multitude of concrete individualities.
Among the other medieval schools that came to be grouped as
the New Kamakura Buddhism were Pure Land (founded by Honen),
based on chanting the name of Amida Buddha; True Pure Land
(founded by Shinran), based on giving thanks to Amida without
requiring the recitation; Momentous Pure Land (founded by Ippen),
known for ecstatic dancing to celebrate Amida; and Nichiren (so
named for the monk Nichiren), based on the doctrines and symbol­
ism of the Lotus Sutra. In contrast to the two Zen sects, all of those
devotional movements stressed the value of the other-power (tariki)
outlook, evoking the efficacy of worshipful rites, such as celebra­
tions, mantras, petitions, prayers, and visualizations. Although they
had many basic differences, the leaders of the new movements also
shared commonalities. Each initially studied but decided to aban­
don the Tendai sect to establish their own school grounded on the
selection (senjaku) of a single simple soteriological pathway. Each
sought to find and propagate a practice that would be effective for
all practitioners to attain enlightenment, regardless of age, rearing,
intelligence, or education.
Indeed, it was Dogen’s doubt about the doctrinal coherence 

48 LIFE AND THOUGHT
and soteriological effectiveness of the Tendai school that led him
to begin searching elsewhere. Despite his young age, he quickly
became convinced that the teaching of original enlightenment failed
to address his sense of urgency about the religious quest. He sought
a teaching that would address the profound uncertainties created
by the pervasive impermanence of all aspects of existence, which
Dogen experienced deeply in his personal life and which the Japa­
nese nation was then undergoing dramatically in ways that affected
all sectors of society.
Dogen’s Great Doubt
The matter of Dogen’s great doubt is summed up succinctly in the
Record of Kenzei-. “If all sentient beings possess the buddha-nature
and Tathagata exists without change [as enunciated in the Nirvana
Sutra], then why must people develop the aspiration for awakening
and vigorously engage in austerities in order to realize this truth?”56
This conundrum is also evoked in a series of questions and enigmas
posed in the opening passage of Dogen’s short essay Universal Rec­
ommendationfor Zazen (Fukanzazengi). The first main work Dogen
wrote after returning from China in 1227, it is considered a manifesto
for the practice of just sitting:
Fundamentally, the basis of the Way is thoroughly pervasive,
so how could it be contingent on practice and realization?
The vehicle of the ancestors is naturally unrestricted, then
why should we expend sustained effort? Surely whole being
is far beyond defilement, so who could believe in a method
to cultivate it? Never is the Way apart from this very place,
so what is the use of a journey to practice it? Yet, if there is a
hair’s breadth of distinction between existence and training,
this gap becomes as great as that between heaven and earth.

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 49
Once the slightest sense of liking or disliking something
arises, confusion reigns and one’s mind is hopelessly lost
in delusion.57
The classic scene of Dogen challenging his elders on the notion of
original enlightenment as depicted in the Illustrated Record of Kenzei.
As shown in the image above, the precocious Dogen, preoccu­
pied with such questions, began to challenge the senior monks on
Mount Hiei by debating the meaning of original enlightenment with
them. Despite his youth, his intelligence and resourcefulness were
evident, as he had a full set of scriptures in hand that he apparently 

5° LIFE AND THOUGHT
understood as well or better than they did. Even though he must
have appreciated the chance to debate, in the end he felt dissatisfied
by their weak responses. The elder priests apparently did not take
seriously his objections. Instead, they seemed intent on protecting
the status quo of conventional beliefs indicated in the scriptures
prized by the Tendai tradition. Since they seemed uninterested or
unable to acknowledge the individualistic imperative Dogen was
eager to highlight based on his personal experiences of imperma­
nence, the young monk must have sensed that he was not in a
context in which his spiritual growth could continue.
In the second major work written after his return from China,
“Discerning the Way,” Dogen wrote in a more positive vein about
the significance of undergoing doubt for attaining spiritual realiza­
tion. The piece is included as the first chapter in some editions of
the Treasury and is considered an ideal introduction to his oeuvre:
Although the Dharma is allotted amply to everyone, when
we have not practiced properly it does not appear, and when
we do not realize this it is not attained. Let it go and it
fills the hand—how could it ever be limited by one versus
many? Speak of it and it fills the mouth—vertically and hor­
izontally, without boundary. Buddhas, always within the
Dharma, dwelling in and maintaining it, do not have any
awareness of restrictions. Living beings, continuously within
and making use of it, also have no restrictions delimiting
their awareness.58
In several additional writings, Dogen revisited the primal ques­
tion of why, if all beings are endowed with buddha-nature, people
must undergo a training process to gain awakening. The challenge
to all practitioners, he argued, is to encounter thoroughgoingly and 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 51
penetrate fully the depth of this inquiry, thereby discovering for
oneself the challenges it poses to original-enlightenment thought.
Dogen consistently emphasized that practice does not “make” or
transform human beings into buddhas. Instead, practicing the
dharma expresses or reveals one’s enlightened nature, or manifests
the dynamic activity of spiritual illumination. Therefore, it must
be understood that it is not we, as calculative selves, who perform
practice. It is the buddha we always already are that is practicing
through each of us as an appropriate vessel. Realization in this
view makes continuous effort with neither regard for an outcome
nor anticipation of the result of accumulating merit from previous
phases of practice.
As a young teenager, however, such realizations lay in the future
for Dogen. What he knew is that he felt unsatisfied and stifled, and
he yearned to search out new relationships and sources of teaching.
As mentioned above, Dogen’s departure from Mount Hiei fit the
pattern of other founders of new Kamakura Buddhist sects, who
similarly had sharp differences with theTendai approach to training.
Each of the emerging leaders sought an alternative pathway based
on his own distinctive religious vision. However, unlike Honen,
Shinran, and Nichiren, who spent more than a decade before taking
leave of the Tendai bastion, Dogen’s initial doubt occurred after less
than two years. He made a full exit by 1217, at the latest estimation,
sensing from the outset that the doctrine of original enlightenment
was self-contradictory.
Based on his later reflections, it is clear that Dogen must have
been pondering ephemerality since the time of his mother’s death
and would not rest until its meaning was clarified and his quest
fulfilled. The first step on this path was for him to join Kenninji
temple. It was there that he first practiced zazen intensively before
traveling to China in the 1220s, where he would learn about Zen

52 LIFE AND THOUGHT
directly from the great continental teachers he had been hearing
about. We will pick up this thread of Dogen’s biography in the
next chapter.
Before moving on to the transformative period—the time from
Dogen’s midteens to his late twenties,'culminating in his crucial
realization experience in China and his return to Japan—in the
remainder of this chapter we will look at Dogen’s religious vision in
the context of the violent and disorienting era of Japanese politics
and culture in which he lived.
Dogen’s Religious Vision in Light of Kamakura Society
Dogen’s life occurred at the dawn of the Kamakura period, when
Japanese society was making a drastic transition in sociopolitical
leadership. The peaceful dominion of the Fujiwara clan, which was
linked through endogamy with the imperial family for four hundred
years during the Heian period, was coming to an end. An ascending
warrior class known as samurai (with the warlords being called
shoguns) was establishing a new style of rule, one that contrasted
strongly with the Heian model of governance by the aristocratic
regency. After centuries of patrician rule uncomplicated by battle,
political stability came to an end. Ongoing civil war occurred as
samurai factions clashed frequently. Two powerful shogunal clans—
first the Hojo family until the 1330s and then the Ashikaga clan
until the mid-i5oos—remained dominant for the next three and a
half centuries.
The Heian period had seen an efflorescence of connections
between Buddhist teachings and Japanese literary arts, and it was
a period characterized by the prestige of literature (bun) and the
rejection of martial arts (Au). The Kamakura period reversed this by
sanctioning battle, yet the new rulers did not eschew connections
to Buddhism. A number of the Hojo and, later, Ashikaga shoguns 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 53
turned to Zen meditative techniques as a compelling form of behav­
ioral discipline sustained by mindful self-control. The move from
Tendai aristocratic ritualism to Zen-inspired self-discipline attuned
to the needs of samurai practitioners shows how religious affiliations
were radically changing in conjunction with abrupt yet enduring
governmental transformations. The new leaders saw Zen as a source
of creativity for religious and literary pursuits and one that would
help them maintain a sense of prestige in the face of ongoing skepti­
cism and ridicule from the dethroned yet still forceful Fujiwara clan.
The unrest in thirteenth-centuryjapan was not limited to domestic
politics or topsy-turvy social and cultural changes. By the 1270s, the
country had also had to fend off two successive Mongol invasions. In
addition, Japanese society was greatly affected by a sequence of nat­
ural catastrophes that plagued the capital, including earthquakes,
tsunamis, tornadoes, typhoons, and resultant fires. These incidents
inspired several eminent Buddhist authors to embrace an outlook
referred to as the “contemplation of impermanence”—attaining full
comprehension of how and why ephemerality is experienced in all
aspects of daily life.59
Consider, for example, the evocation of the impact of fierce com­
bat in the epic Tale of Heike (Heike monogatari). The following passage
relates to events that took place at the beginning of the shogunal
era in the late twelfth century: “The sound of the Gion temple bell
echoes the impermanence of all things, and the color of the fragrant
flowers reveal the truth that even the prosperous must decline. The
proud do not endure for they are like a dream on a spring night;
the mighty fall in the end because they are as dust before the wind.”
Another example comes from the opening passage of An Account of
My Hut (Hojoki), a text that greatly influenced Henry David Tho­
reau’s period of reclusion at Walden pond seven centuries later.
The text was written by the prominent literary figure Chomei, who
renounced life in Kyoto to become a Pure Land eremite living in a 

54 LIFE AND THOUGHT
ten-foot Buddhist hermitage. As he famously wrote in 1212, “The
river flows ceaselessly, and its water never stays the same. The bub­
bles that float upon its pools disappear and form again, but never
last very long. It is the same with people in this world and their
residences.... Death in the morning and birth in the evening is the
way of things, which are ephemeral like foam on a stream.”
In the Japanese Buddhist world, the chaotic violence of the
Kamakura period, and the cultural emphasis on ephemerality, led
to an embrace of the theory of the deterioration of the dharma,
also known as the age of decline (mappo). This notion was linked
to an ancient Buddhist prophecy indicating that, beginning fif­
teen hundred years after the death of Shakyamuni, or around the
year 1000 c.e., common people would no longer be able to attain
enlightenment for themselves. Instead, they would need to rely
on the power of a salvific buddha or bodhisattva, such as Amida,
Kannon, Monju, or Jizo, to facilitate their awakening.
Unlike many of the era’s other sectarian founders, Dogen ada­
mantly rejected the theory of mappo. In contrast to that view, which
emphasized spiritual and moral collapse, Dogen came to adamantly
advocate the method of unwavering commitment to zazen. He held
that the practice of just sitting was an example of realizing the true
dharma (shobo) that can be attained at any time, without partiality or
lack, by virtue of making an effort by and for oneself in conjunction
with all other beings. Dogen’s practice approach thus stood in stark
contrast to the advocates of the theory of decline, who generally
advocated the path based on other-power belief in Amida. Like
them, however, Dogen affirmed that everyone, whether clever or
foolish, is capable of attaining enlightenment so long as they act
with dignity and practice with determination.
Dogen s approach required extensive periods of silent meditation
undertaken not to reach a set goal but with sitting as an end itself
that infuses all thoughts and other activities. He encouraged his 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 55
followers to cast off any unconscious concern with having a pur­
pose, since that instrumentalism would betray an ulterior motive
or underlying pragmatic intention. In his writings, he frequently
criticized examples of concentration, especially but not limited to
introspective methods propagated by the Rinzai Zen sect, that did
not live up to his ideal of purposelessness. He did not, however,
regard the method of just sitting as a solitary technique, since he
also strongly emphasized that genuine awarehess must occur in
each and every possible situation.
This implication meant that the seemingly mundane actions of
a monastic, performed throughout the year and continuing during
a full lifetime, were to be conducted with a stately demeanor emu­
lating the majestic conduct of practicing buddhas. Dogen’s view
was that authentically awakened adepts perpetually realize what
he called the one great matter (ichi daiji). This perpetual realiza­
tion entails coming to terms with the ultimate meaning of life and
death, or the arising and desistence of all elements of existence. That
insight enables the practitioner to undertake enlightened behavior
in routine affairs as well as exceptional events. “In the swift march
of ephemerality,” Dogen wrote, “birth and death are vital concerns.”
Moreover, “Just by understanding that birth-death is itself nirvana,
one neither despises birth-death [as a form of bondage] nor pursues
nirvana [as a goal]. Only then will you be able to gain freedom from
birth-death within the realm of birth-death.”60
Although he rejected the theory of decline that was so promi­
nent in the Japanese Buddhist culture of his time and in the writ­
ings of his fellow founders of new Buddhist sects, we can see in
the quotes above that Dogen nevertheless reflected the Zeitgeist of
early medieval Japan. He emphasized intensely subjective religious
experience based ori keen awareness of mortality and finitude. He
wrote compellingly of the effects of impermanence while adding
the moral imperative that seekers must be able to seize the moment

56 LIFE AND THOUGHT
(an idea often referred to in the West by the Latin phrase carpe diem)
through attentive awareness and dignified behavior. He exhorted
his followers to realize enlightenment right here and now rather
than as a remote, future-based goal:
Impermanence is swift, so negotiating life-and-death is the
great matter. For the short while you are alive, if you wish
to study or practice some activity, just practice the Buddha
Way and study the Buddha Dharma. Our life is like a dream.
Time passes swiftly. Dewlike existence easily disappears.
Since time waits for no one, strive to do good unto others
and follow the will of the Buddha as long as you are alive.61
Dogen’s imperative to undergo self-renewal in light of ephem-
erality highlights that his approach was by no means pessimistic
or life denying. Rather, he held an altogether positive outlook, as
is evident in the injunction used as the title of a waka verse: “Not a
moment is to be spent idly in the twenty-four hours of each day!”
Dogen and the Chinese Tradition
It is critical, in understanding Dogen, to examine the Japanese
political, cultural, and religious currents of his time. But it is equally
important to grasp the extent to which he was influenced by, and
saw his work as an extension of, the model of Chinese Chan. The arc
of Dogen’s religious path—facing persistent challenges to attaining
spiritual authenticity in the first half of his life and enacting effec­
tive institutional authority in the second half—is emblematic of the
pathway of classical Zen teachers as expressed in numerous Chi­
nese “transmissions of the torch” (Ch. chuandeng lu, Jp. dentoroku)
records, an important literary genre that Dogen helped introduce to
Japan. During the Tang and Song dynasties, hundreds of prominent 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 57
masters were said to have spent a significant period (in some cases,
as much as several decades) dealing with a deep feeling of instability
concerning their capacity to attain enlightenment. These incidents
reflected an interior deficiency that was overcome by realizing that
the “gateless gate” (Ch. wumen, Jp. mumon) of true reality remains
wide open.62
These intrepid wayfarers had in most cases explored alternative
forms of B uddhism, Confucianism, or Daoism early in life, prior to
undergoing rigorous Zen training. At some turning point, they felt
hopelessly trapped, like a rat in a cage, or as confused as a dog that
cannot resist licking a bowl of hot oil. They wandered in delusion
while enduring additional psychological tests and setbacks. The
intensity of their mental conditions often manifested in physical
maladies, such as panic attacks, with symptoms resembling those of
what is today called nervous breakdown. Eventually a spontaneous
sense of revulsion regarding egotistical attachments triggered lib­
eration based on self-extrication from ignorance. This was usually
brought about by fortuitous meetings with wise teachers or auspi­
cious supernal events initiated by bodhisattvas or other ethereal
guides. These encounters enabled the seeker to realize an electri­
fying moment of awakening and, after cultivating this experience,
to become an independent leader of his or her own self-sustaining
Zen community.
Dogen was particularly fond of citing the propitious accounts
of two Tang-dynasty monks, each of whom realized enlightenment
in an instantaneous flash of spiritual awareness after years of unre­
solved confusion. One monk was Lingyun, who resolved thirty years
of unproductive training upon seeing peach trees in bloom one
day. The other was Xiangyan, who, following years of struggling
to clarify doctrine and having gone so far as to burn all his books,
had an intuitive awakening while sweeping the temple grounds
when he heard the pinging sound of a pebble striking a bamboo 

5« LIFE AND THOUGHT
tree. After experiencing seemingly innocuous, fleeting sensations
that ironically connected them with the wholeness of reality, both
Zen masters found creative ways to build large assemblies of devo­
tees to carry on the leadership of their lineages. This paradigm of
undergoing spontaneous insight following years of uncertainty was
reenacted in Dogen’s own experience of enlightenment at Mount
Tiantong, which came after years of anxiety and doubt to the point
of hopelessness.
As another example of continental influence, Dogen, once he
became a temple abbot, introduced to Japanese Buddhism the Zen
custom of the master delivering formal sermons (jodo) in a dharma
hall. Following the Chinese approach, he took a high seat on a
platform before the assembly of monks, who lined up according to
institutional seniority and ranking. These sermons usually involved
the citing and interpretating of koans, while demonstrating the
self-confidence to refashion the puzzling and paradoxical sayings of
his predecessors (and the standard commentaries on them). Dogen
often accompanied these homilies with dramatic gestures, such as
banging his foot on the floor, throwing down his staff, or waving in
the air his ceremonial fly whisk before walking away from the dais.
Such dramatic enactments were meant to encourage the assembly
members to think through their own conclusions.
Dogen often took liberty with Chinese teachings, including
a prominent injunction by Rujing that he frequently cites in his
writings. Rujing recommended that practitioners adhere solely to
just sitting as the gateway to casting off body-mind rather than per­
forming the typical Mahayana Buddhist rites of burning incense,
reverential bowing, offering repentance, or chanting scriptures.
Despite Rujing’s cautionary words, Dogen found creative ways to
incorporate almost all of these observances into the activity of his
assembly. He also placed emphasis on enacting the daily chores of
cooking rice, wearing and washing ecclesial apparel properly, clean­

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 59
ing floors thoroughly, scrubbing one’s face and body immaculately,
and spotlessly brushing one’s teeth. He likewise recommended car­
rying out numerous supplementary responsibilities in addition to
celebrating miscellaneous weekly or monthly ceremonies as well
as anniversaries and memorials. Dogen was a subversive thinker in
many ways, but it is clear he mainly sought to develop an effective
form of monasticism true to Buddhist principles and relevant to
medieval Japanese society.
Despite certain differences in emphasis, interpretation, and form,
it is clear that Dogen intended to signal full agreement with the
essence of Rujing’s admonition. Dogen consistently highlighted
the value of purposeless zazen while deemphasizing the role of
the outer trappings of monastic endeavors. These were primarily
to be valued for their focus on interior cultivation, and thus they
could be modified based on circumstances. Moreover, he did not
endorse one of the methods rejected by Rujing, the votive recitation
of Amida Buddha’s sacred name (nenbutsu) as used in Pure Land
Buddhism. Dogen compared this technique to the useless croaking
of a frog, although there are clearly indications in his writings that
he appreciated the value of prayerful devotion. The criticism was
no doubt part of the scathing put-downs volleyed back and forth
by leaders of the new Kamakura movements, who were eager to
promulgate their own lineages in the midst of a highly competitive
religious environment. Dogen must have recognized that one of his
evangelical goals as Japan’s original Zen teacher was to win over
adherents of chanting by convincing them of the greater merits of
just-sitting practice.
To understand more clearly how Dogen integrated Chinese models
of Zen theory and practice with Japanese customs and methods,
the next chapter examines the critical thirteen or so transformative 

60 LIFE AND THOUGHT
years of his life. During this period, he quickly abandoned the Ten-
dai school to take up sitting meditation at Kenninji, Japan’s first
Zen temple, established in Kyoto by Eisai. After practicing there
for close to a decade, a period for which little is mentioned in the
traditional narrative, Dogen left with Eisai’s main disciple, Myozen,
for the continent. There he struggled mightily with doubts and
frustration for the first two years. Then, in 1225, he encountered the
ideal teacher in Rujing, attained enlightenment, and studied with
great determination under Rujing’s tutelage for two additional years
before returning to Japan to begin his teaching mission.

McRae’s Rules of Zen Studies
1. It’s not true, and therefore it’s more important.
The contents of Zen texts should not be evaluated using a simple-
minded criterion of journalistic accuracy, that is, “Did it really happen?”
For any event or saying to have occurred would be a trivial reality in-
volving a mere handful of people at one imagined point in time, which
would be overwhelmed by the thousands of people over the centuries
who were involved in the creation of Zen legends. The mythopoeic cre-
ation of Zen literature implies the religious imagination of the Chinese
people, a phenomenon of vast scale and deep signiﬁcance.
2. Lineage assertions are as wrong as they are strong.
Statements of lineage identity and “history” were polemical tools of
self-assertion, not critical evaluations of chronological fact according
to some modern concept of historical accuracy. To the extent that any
lineage assertion is signiﬁcant, it is also a misrepresentation; lineage as-
sertions that can be shown to be historically accurate are also inevitably
inconsequential as statements of religious identity.
3. Precision implies inaccuracy.
Numbers, dates, and other details lend an air of verisimilitude to a story,
but the more they accumulate, the more we should recognize them as
literary tropes. Especially in Zen studies, greater detail is an artifact of
temporal distance, and the vagueness of earlier accounts should be com-
forting in its integrity. While we should avoid joining a misguided quest
for origins, we should also be quick to distinguish between “good data”
and ornamental ﬂuª. Even as we ponder the vectors of medieval
polemics.
xix
4. Romanticism breeds cynicism.
Storytellers inevitably create heroes and villains, and the depiction of
Zen’s early patriarchs and icons cripples our understanding of both
the Tang “golden age” and the supposedly stagnant formalism of the
Song dynasty. If one side is romanticized, the other must be viliﬁed,
and both subjects pass incognito. The collusion between Zen roman-
ticists and the apologists for Confucian triumphalism—which has
Song Neo-Confucianism climbing to glory on the back of a defeated
Buddhism—is an obstacle to the understanding of both Chan and the
Chinese civil tradition. The corollary is this: Cold realism eliminates
dismissive misapprehension.
xx MCRAE’S RULES OF ZEN STUDIES
chapter 1
Looking at Lineage
A Fresh Perspective on Chan Buddhism
How should we begin this discussion of Chan Buddhism? One device
would be to begin with a story, some striking anecdote to arouse the
reader’s curiosity. There are certainly many good possibilities within the
annals of Chan. One is the account of an earnest Chinese supplicant—
the eventual second patriarch, Huike—cutting oª his arm in order to hear
the teachings from the enigmatic Indian sage, Bodhidharma. How many
times this story must have been told in meditation halls in China and
throughout the world, in order to inspire trainees to greater eªort! Or
we could ﬁnd something a bit less gruesome—perhaps the tale about Lay-
man Pang sinking all his possessions to the bottom of a river because he
had learned the futility of chasing after worldly riches. Surely this exam-
ple of unencumbered freedom is meant to teach us a deep spiritual mes-
sage? The stock of legendary accounts that might be used, each with
slightly diªerent import, is endless. And there are other possible begin-
nings, as well. Many authors have their own favored ways of character-
izing the most essential features of Chan, presenting some short list of
features to sum up the entire tradition. Or we could avoid such bland gen-
eralization and simply celebrate the incredible creativity of the Chan tra-
dition over the centuries, its vibrancy as a religious phenomenon.
The approach adopted here—already taken by posing these very
deliberations—is to begin by asking questions, to arouse in the reader not
merely a raw curiosity but the faculties of critical interrogation as well.
Speciﬁcally, let us begin by directly considering the question of how we
should look at Chan Buddhism: What approaches should we adopt, and
which should we avoid? What forms of analysis will be fruitful, and which
would merely repeat commonly accepted stereotypes?
1
The question of how we should look at Chan Buddhism is one we
should not attempt to avoid; to simply ignore the issue and begin a recita-
tion of facts and concepts would be to make an unspoken decision, to an-
swer the question by adopting a policy of denial. But neither would it be
appropriate for me to dictate the answer in ﬂat and simple terms: as I com-
pose these lines on the outskirts of Taipei at the very end of the twenti-
eth century, and edit them in Honolulu at the beginning of the twenty-
ﬁrst, I am conscious of the incredible multivalence of cultural identity
implicit in this process of exposition, both in my own person and those
of my intended audiences. That is, in various ways and at diªerent times
I have been a scholar and practitioner, student and teacher, lover and her-
mit, and what I am about to present here I have learned through a series
of extended educational encounters in America, Japan, and Taiwan. This
text is intended for use by listeners and readers not only in China, but in
Europe, the United States, and Japan as well—so how could I possibly
presume to argue that there should be oneway to look at Chan Buddhism?
Amultiplicity of perspectives and a certain ﬂuidity of analytical typolo-
gies are givens in this postmodern world.
Deconstructing the Chan Lineage Diagram
For convenience, let me begin by deﬁning a perspective on Chan that I
wish to deconstruct and thereby avoid. I should confess that I mean only
to caricature this perspective, so that we can use the observations made
now to form a lever with which to push ourselves into a certain type of
understanding (to paraphrase the positivist philosopher John Dewey and
his student Hu Shih, who spoke of studying the past to create a lever with
which to push China into a certain sort of future). The perspective to which
I refer is the traditionalist approach depicted graphically in the lineage di-
agram presented in ﬁgure 1. Diagrams such as this are included in virtu-
ally every book on Chan that has ever been written, where they are used
as a framework for presenting a historical narrative. Instead of plunging
directly into that narrative and building upon the content of the diagram
per se, though, we should ﬁrst consider its semiotic impact as a medium
of interpretation and communication. If the medium is the message (ac-
cording to the saying popularized by Marshall McLuhan), what message
is conveyed by the structure of the diagram itself? It is often noted that
Chan claims to “not posit words” (bu li wenzi, fury ñmonji)and that it
represents a “separate transmission outside the teachings” (jiaowai bie-
2 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
zhuan, kyê ge betsuden). Almost always—as I am about to do right now—
these phrases are introduced with the ironic observation that Chan cer-
tainly does use a lot of words in describing its own teachings. We will
come back to the Chan use of language and its not “positing” of words
later, but here we can observe that the lineage diagram provides the ba-
sic model for how Chan appreciates its own historical background. That
Seven Buddhas of the Past
Uá kyamuni
Indian Patriarchs: Kás yapa (1st Indian Patriarch)
Ananda
Chinese Patriarchs: Bodhidharma (= 28th Indian and 
1st Chinese Patriarch)
Huike
Sengcan
Daoxin
(to Oxhead school)
Hongren
Huineng Shenxiu 
(Southern school) (Northern school)
Nanyue Huairang Qingyuan Xingshi
Mazu Daoyi Shitou Xiqian
Linji Yixuan Caoshan and Dongshan
[Five Houses: Linji, Caodong, Guiyang, Yunmen, and Fayan]
Dahui Zonggao Hongzhi Zhengjue
(Linji [Rinzai] school) (Caodong [S ê tê ] school)
figure 1. Lineage diagram of Chinese Chan Buddhism.
is, Chan does not deﬁne itself as being one among a number of Buddhist
schools based on a particular scripture (such as the Tiantai [Tendai] school
with its emphasis on the Lotus Sñtra,for example). Instead, Chan texts
present the school as Buddhism itself, or as thecentral teaching of Bud-
dhism, which has been transmitted from the seven Buddhas of the past
to the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs, the six Chinese patriarchs, and all
the generations of Chinese and Japanese Chan and Zen masters that fol-
low. (Bodhidharma occupies a pivotal position as both the twenty-eighth
Indian and ﬁrst Chinese patriarch.) It took several centuries for this en-
tire schema to be developed; the earliest building blocks appeared at the
very end of the seventh century, and the complete system was published
perhaps as early as 801 but certainly by the year 952.
One of the advantages of beginning by considering this lineage dia-
gram, to be sure, is that it introduces the most important players in our
story. The seven Buddhas of the past are legendary ﬁgures to whom we
need pay only scant attention; although Chan texts amplify and modify
their religious identities somewhat, for our purposes we can admit them
into evidence solely as part of the cultural repertoire Chan inherited from
the larger tradition of East Asian Mahá yá na Buddhism. Chan has its own
mythic take on Uá kyamuni, of course, quite diªerent from our own con-
ception of him as the “historical” Buddha—but this too is a subject for
another time. Nor must we pay much attention to the twenty-eight In-
dian patriarchs. The manner in which their hagiographies were explicated
is a fascinating and exceedingly complex subject of study, but we do not
have the space to consider it here.
1 On the other hand, the six Chinese
patriarchs from Bodhidharma onward, along with Huineng and Shenxiu
in the sixth generation and their several generations of disciples, will ap-
pear more often than any of the other players in this drama. (The reader
will note at once that no disciples of Shenxiu’s are listed in our lineage
diagram, which is a telling omission in itself. I consider this brieﬂy on p.
14 below.) The ﬁgures remembered as icons of the Linji (Rinzai) and
Caodong (Sê tê ) schools, whose names adorn the balance of the diagram,
are among the most important in the history of the tradition.
We can draw some important basic inferences from this transmission
diagram. First, a note on historical origins: the Chan lineage scheme is a
combined product of Indian and Chinese culture. Often authors describe
Chan as the “most Chinese” of all the Chinese Buddhist schools, and part
of what they are referring to is the Chan genealogical model. (I am par-
ticularly allergic to this rhetoric, since such expressions are generally lit-
tle more than unexplicated tautologies generated through a sense of cul-
4 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
tural chauvinism rather than real analytical insight. And the fact that D.T.
Suzuki and others say virtually the same thing with regard to Japanese
Zen, that it represents somehow the essence of Japaneseculture, should
alert us to both the essential vacuity and the strategic intentions of such
sentiments.)
2 Actually, the origins of this lineage-based transmission
scheme are to be found in Indian Buddhism and the fourth- and ﬁfth-
century Buddhist meditation tradition of Kashmir. There are a number
of parallels between the Chan transmission scheme and Chinese family
genealogies of the eighth century and later, but we should remember that
Indian Buddhists had parents and teachers, family genealogies and initi-
ation lineages, just as the Chinese did.
3 As an amalgamation of Indian
and Chinese elements, though, the Chinese Chan transmission schema
developed within the Chinese Buddhist context and was particularly well
adapted to that milieu. Just as DengXiaoping talked about “socialism with
Chinese characteristics,” we could refer to the Chinese Chan transmission
model as a “Buddhist genealogical theory with Chinese characteristics.”
Second, by using the lineage diagram to deﬁne Chan as a “separate
transmission outside the teachings,” the advocates of Chan were declar-
ing their school to be profoundly diªerent from, and fundamentally bet-
ter than, all other Buddhist schools: where the other schools represented
only interpretations of Buddhism, Chan constitutes the real thing, Bud-
dhism itself. This is a polemical move, meant to establish the superiority
of Chan over all other schools. Other East Asian Buddhist schools reacted
in part by devising their own lineage transmission schemes, and in part
by saying that Chan emphasized only one of the “three learnings” of moral-
ity, meditation, and wisdom. Whether we view medieval Chinese Bud-
dhists as concerned solely with the highest forms of wisdom or as work-
ing to obtain imperial patronage and other this-worldly beneﬁts, or
engaged in both endeavors simultaneously, at the very least they were com-
peting with their contemporaries for intellectual and cultural hegemony.
We should thus not overlook the polemical quality of the lineage theory.
Incidentally, to describe Chan Buddhism in terms of polemics and con-
testation is not to exercise any value judgment, let alone to denigrate the
tradition, but merely to recognize historical fact.
Third, what counts in the Chan transmission scheme are not the “facts”
of what happened in the lives of Uá kyamuni, Bodhidharma, Huineng, and
others, but rather how these ﬁgures were perceived in terms of Chan
mythology. This point will come up repeatedly here, and I will argue a
rather complex position: In case after case, what the texts say happened
almost certainly did notoccur, in terms of a straightforward but simple-
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 5
minded criterion of journalistic accuracy. But rather than being ﬁxated
on notions of fact and fabrication, we should notice the very dynamism
of the mythopoeic processes involved. Whether or not any anecdote ac-
tually represents the words spoken and events that occurred “accurately”
is only a historical accident, and in any case the supposedly “original”
events would have involved only a very small number of people, at most
the members of a single local community. What is of far greater conse-
quence is the process by which that anecdote was generated and circu-
lated, edited and improved, and thus transmitted throughout an entire
population of Chan practitioners and devotees, until it became part of
the ﬂuid body of legendary lore by which Chan masters came to be
identiﬁed throughout Chinese culture. This is McRae’s ﬁrst law of Zen
studies: “It’s not true, and therefore it’s more important.” This is to say
that ﬁction—actually, a diªerent sort of truth—is more important than
the simplistic criterion of the question “Did it really happen?”
4
Fourth, based on the rhetoric of sñnyatá ,or emptiness,5nothing is ac-
tually transmitted in this transmission scheme. What occurs between each
teacher and his successor is merely an approval or authorization (yinke;
inka)of the successor’s attainment of complete enlightenment.
6 This is
ﬁrst of all a doctrinal principle of Chan Buddhism itself, but we should
recognize that the most important parts of the diagram are not the sep-
arate names of individual patriarchs, but the spaces between them, the
lines that join them. That is, what is being represented is not only a se-
ries of human ﬁgures but the encounters between each ﬁgure and his im-
mediate predecessor and successor. As is frequently stressed in the texts
of Chan, there is no “thing”—such as enlightenment, the Buddha-mind,
or whatever—that is actually passed from one patriarch to the next. The
existence of such an entity would violate a fundamental Buddhist doc-
trinal theme, the denial of unchanging, substantive, and individual iden-
tity to the things and beings of this world. With regard to persons, this
doctrinal theme is called “no-self” (aná tman); with regard to all the var-
ious component elements of existence, including persons, this is called
“emptiness” (sñnyatá ).This is not a merely philosophical consideration,
but rather an existential posture with profound genealogical impact: the
focus is not on “what” is being transmitted, but on the relationship of
encounter between the Buddhas and Patriarchs. The act of transmission
thus involves not the bestowing of some “thing” from one master to the
next, but the recognition of shared spiritual maturity. It is a cosmic dance
involving a special set of partners, a relationship of encounter, a meeting
at the deepest spiritual level.
6 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
Fifth, since the enlightenment of each Buddha and Patriarch is com-
plete, there is no diªerentiation between the religious status of the In-
dian Buddhas and Patriarchs and their Chinese counterparts. This was per-
haps the most important reason why this lineage-based exposition was
attractive to medieval Chinese Buddhists, since it raised the authority of
native Chinese ﬁgures to equal those of their Indian predecessors. This is
very important in terms of the siniﬁcation of Buddhism, that is, the adap-
tation of Buddhism within Chinese culture, a subject that is vitally rele-
vant to a wide range of subjects in Chinese religions and Chinese studies
in general. At the moment, though, what I want to emphasize is the most
striking and most frequently overlooked characteristic of this diagram:
the homologizing impact of its very simple lines of succession.
By representing Chan Buddhism in terms of a straight-line succession
from the seven Buddhas of the past through the six Chinese Patriarchs,
diagrams such as this are used to simplify fantastically complicated sets
of cultural and religious phenomena. Every time a straight-line relation-
ship between two masters is posited in a lineage diagram, an entire world
of complexity, an intricate universe of human relationships and experi-
ences, is eªectively eliminated from view. Could any religious ﬁgure’s iden-
tity possibly be adequately summarized by selecting only one out of a
whole lifetime of relationships? Even a quick look at the biographies of
Chinese Chan masters shows the extent of the distortion involved: where
the sources are adequate, we sometimes see multiple awakening experi-
ences
7 catalyzed by diªerent teachers and events, yet in the lineage dia-
grams these are all reduced to single lines of transmission. The use of lin-
eage diagrams to represent the Chan tradition, then—and their use is as
old as the tradition itself, since it was by explicating genealogical speciﬁcs
that Chan generated its own identity as a speciﬁc religious movement—
is a hegemonic trope, the willful extension of one way of perceiving the
world to the exclusion of all other viewpoints. (I brieﬂy discuss the var-
ious branches and divisions of the diagram beginning on p. 9 below.)
Sixth, the “genealogical model” is important not only for the histori-
cal self-understanding of the Chan school in its transmission from Uá kya-
muni Buddha through Bodhidharma and onward, but also for the man-
ner in which it deﬁnes how Chan spiritual practice itself is carried out.
That is, in contrast to a basically Indian conception of meditation prac-
tice as an individual yogic endeavor of self-puriﬁcation and progressive
advancement toward buddhahood, the Chan genealogical model implies
that the most important aspect of spiritual cultivation takes place in the
encounterbetween teacher and student. Chan trainees still spent long hours
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 7
in the meditation hall—we can be sure of that, even though the texts of-
ten do not bother conﬁrming the fact—but the focus of Chan rhetoric
and literature is on the dialogues and exchanges between each master and
his students, or between each student destined to be a master and his var-
ious teachers. It is thus not only the Chan school’s self-understanding of
its own religious history, but the religious practice of Chan itself that is
fundamentally genealogical. By saying that Chan practice is fundamen-
tally genealogical,I mean that it is derived from a genealogically under-
stood encounter experience that is relational(involving interaction be-
tween individuals rather than being based solely on individual eªort),
generational(in that it is organized according to parent-child, or rather
teacher-student, generations), and reiterative(i.e., intended for emulation
and repetition in the lives of present and future teachers and students).
No matter what the comparison or relationship between Chinese Chan
and earlier forms of Indian Buddhist meditation practice, this particular
complex of qualities is not found in other schools or forms of Buddhist
training.
8
In the most basic historical terms, though, we should recognize that
the homologizing impact of the Chan lineage diagram represents a pro-
found distortion of the subject matter. This is McRae’s second rule of Zen
studies: “Lineage assertions are as wrong as they are strong.” In more for-
mal language, this means that lineage assertions are problematic in direct
proportion to their signiﬁcance. That is, every time we read that the mas-
ters of such-and-such a group are related to each other in a lineal succes-
sion, the statement is probably inaccurate in some sense, and the more
important it is to the religious identity of the individuals involved, the
less accurate it will be. If nothing much is made of the relationship, the
lineage assertion is more likely to be correct than if a great deal rides on
it. Almost always, of course, the ﬁgure at the end of the list, or even that
individual’s students, has the most at stake in making such assertions. And
if his religious identity must be deﬁned on the basis of a lineal succession,
if his historical status depends on being the recipient of the cumulative
charisma of one particular set of predecessors, then it always seems that
some signiﬁcant distortion of the facts has taken place. Of course, my use
of the word factsshould remind you of the ﬁrst rule, which remains rel-
evant here: The presentation of reality in lineage schema represents a cer-
tain type of myth-making, and what is not “true” per se is inevitably more
important!
Seventh, I referred above to “each teacher and hissuccessor” (see p.
6), and the gender-speciﬁc terminology is appropriate. The Chan tradi-
8 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
tion is overwhelmingly male-dominated, and the strong implications of
the term patriarchalin English (referring both to Chan ﬁgureheads and
a male-centered ideology) is entirely suitable here. Nancy Jay has analyzed
how genealogical systems tend to create justiﬁcations for removing
women from the nexus of power and fecundity,
9 and in a later chapter,
we will consider the manner in which Chan represented a way of orga-
nizing power within the Chinese Buddhist monastic establishment. There
is also, of course, a broader, gender-related issue concerning Chan as a
patriarchal ideology: to put it bluntly, Was Chan a weapon used to op-
press women within Chinese society? Alas, I cannot deliberate on this is-
sue in these pages, but when the subject comes up, scholars should cer-
tainly not shrink from it. This awareness, however, is helpful here in a
diªerent and perhaps even larger sense. I do ﬁnd it germane to deal with
the following variant of the question: Was Chan a weapon in the op-
pression of Chinese religious practitioners in general, or did it serve to
suppress certain groups of them? This is a shocking question, to be sure,
but it seems to me that any means by which knowledge is structured—
and the lineage format is certainly that—both allowsand suppressesdiªer-
ent types of perspectives. I am by no means unsympathetic to the Chan
tradition, nor to the realm of Buddhist meditation and spiritual cultiva-
tion in general, but a consideration of how the Chan school’s dominance
in Chinese Buddhism may have militated against alternative viewpoints
seems an obvious aspect of our intellectual responsibility.
At this point, you may be surprised that we have derived so many in-
ferences from one simple diagram, but we could certainly coax numer-
ous additional insights from it if space were not an issue. Let us leave fur-
ther comment on the Chan lineage diagram and the genealogical identity
of the Chan tradition until later, though, and turn instead to the reason
we began this discussion in the ﬁrst place.
Avoiding the “String of Pearls” Fallacy
The preceding observations regarding the lineage diagram are to some
extent preventive medicine, prophylaxis against a type of interpretation
to be avoided. Simply put, the message is this: To represent Chan Bud-
dhism in terms that are congruent with the lineage paradigm is to run
the risk of mere repetition, without saying anything fundamentally in-
sightful. Rather than performing legitimate analytical investigations, to
do so would be merely to recapitulate an inherited symbolic system, and
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 9
in this context one’s most cherished intellectual nuances would be noth-
ing more than trivial variations on the genealogical model. Here it is use-
ful to make a clear insider/outsider distinction: What is both expected
and natural for a religious practitioner operating withinthe Chan epis-
teme, what is necessary in order to achieve membership within the pa-
triarchal lineage, becomes intellectually debilitating for those standing,
even if only temporarily, outsidethe realm of Chan as its observers and
analysts. What from the standpoint of Chan religious practice may be
absolutely essential becomes, from the standpoint of intellectual analy-
sis, the passive submission to a hegemony, the unwitting contraction of
an intellectual pathology.
So what is it that we should not be doing? Or, to put it another way,
how can we recognize when we are falling, or in danger of falling, into
patterns that inhibit our ability to see the history of Chan in all its rich
complexity?
Seen from this perspective, the issue is really quite simple: Whenever
we pretend to explain Chan in terms of lineal successions from one great
master to another, we run the risk of committing the “string of pearls”
fallacy, in which the evolution of Chan Buddhism is described in terms
of a sequence of individual masters like pearls on a string. This is a vari-
ant of the “great man” fallacy of historical writing, in which one explains
the inevitably messy details of past realities in terms of the willful endeavors
of a limited number of heroic men. (Once again, the gender-speciﬁc ter-
minology is warranted.) To be more logically precise, it is also an exam-
ple of the fallacy of archetypes, which “consists in conceptualizing change
in terms of the re-enactment of primordial archetypes which exist out-
side of time.”
10
In terms of Zen studies, this tendency is starkly apparent in the way
Dunhuang manuscripts have been used to supplement rather than radi-
cally transform the appreciation of Chan in many writings. Atrove of cul-
tural treasures similar to the Dead Sea scrolls, the Dunhuang manuscripts
were discovered in a walled-up cave in Chinese Central Asia at the turn
of the twentieth century and then dispersed to various libraries through-
out the world. They provided a cross-section of Chan documents from
the eighth to the tenth centuries, just before the great editorial homoge-
nization of the Song dynasty took place.
11 Access to these manuscripts
has allowed scholars to explore the early phases of Chinese Chan Bud-
dhism in ways that would simply not have been possible in their absence,
and the analysis of this magniﬁcent trove has occupied the attentions of
scholars (not only in Chan, but in other ﬁelds of Buddhist and Daoist
10 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
studies, and various realms of historical and sociological research as well)
for the entire twentieth century. However, in Chan studies, evidence from
the Dunhuang manuscripts has most often been used merely to paint bet-
ter features onto the same old traditional picture, merely to add attrac-
tive detail to the genealogical model described above. Thus, scholars have
used Dunhuang manuscripts in conjunction with other evidence to de-
vise more vivid portraits of Bodhidharma, Huineng, and others as indi-
vidualﬁgures, without changing the framework in which these individ-
uals are presented in any substantial manner, and certainly without trying
to work out the cultural and religious dynamics that led to their inclu-
sion in the genealogical paradigm in the ﬁrst place. There are exceptions,
of course, but they are comparatively few and far between.
I am not suggesting that we never include descriptions of lineage suc-
cessions in our writing on Chan—far from it—but only that, when we
do so, we should be conscious of the reasons for their use and remain
aware of the risks involved. Not only would it be impossible to talk about
Chan without ever using concepts related to lineage—to the extent it can
be described as a continuous set of processes, Chan is at its most profound
level a genealogicalset of phenomena—but we will gain the greatest beneﬁt
from shifting our focus and perspective repeatedly as we move through
the evidence. To commit the “string of pearls” fallacy is to remain ﬁxed
and unaware in a single posture. Rather than simply move to a diªerent
static position, however, we should work to illuminate our subject from
a number of angles, to encounter it with diªerent aspects of our inter-
pretive capacities.
AProvisional Device: The Phases of Chan
Figure 2 (p. 13) is a simple chart describing Chan in a manner quite dif-
ferent from that of the lineage diagram (ﬁg. 1) discussed above. Where
the traditional Chan diagram lists names of individual human beings,
this chart lists named phases or trends in the evolution of Chan.
12 The
names of these phases or trends are not universally accepted in writings
about Chan, and the boundaries between them are subject to debate. I
preserve these ambiguities by not adopting this terminology and peri-
odization without question throughout these chapters; on the contrary,
we should pay close attention to the intrinsic fuzziness of the borders
between the phases named so uniquely and unambiguously here. It is in
large part through considering the failure of any margins to tightly cap-
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 11
ture these arbitrary entities that we will be able to see the utility of this
periodization.
Each of the named phases refers not to a speciﬁc set of individuals per
se (although some of the most representative ﬁgures are listed), but to a
style or conﬁguration of religious activity that is known through a vari-
ety of sources. One of the primary models by which each phase is char-
acterized is, of course, a list of teachers, known as patriarchs in the tradi-
tional lineage scheme, who function as ﬁgureheads for a certain type of
religious identity. These men (and very occasionally women) serve as ex-
emplars of enlightened behavior, whose stories are told and retold in or-
der to pattern the behavior of subsequent generations of students.
13(Even
as Chan involves the transcendence of patterned behavior in enlightened
spontaneity, this abandoning of patterning must itself be patterned in or-
der to be understood, modeled before it can be imitated, deconstructed,
and reﬁgured.) Information about these ﬁgureheads, as well as doctrinal
explanations and other types of information, was circulated both orally
and through written texts. Hence each phase of Chan can be described
in terms of multiple dimensions: its exemplary human representatives,
the geography and timing of their activities, the texts that describe their
activities and convey their teachings, and so forth. Figure 2 provides in-
formation of this sort brieﬂy in the summary for each phase.
Hence, the basic diªerence between the lineage diagram and the chart
in ﬁgure 2 is that, where the diagram tends to homologize all the indi-
vidualsrepresented as identically enlightened representatives of a single
confraternity—to enable (and simultaneously limit) the understanding of
them according to a meaningful yet unitary religious mode—the chart
seeks to distinguish qualitative diªerences along a chronological axis, to
facilitate multiple perspectives and modes of understanding. The goal of
the chart is the generation of meaningful distinctions, not the assertion
of an unbroken continuity of patriarchal authority.
You will note that the lineage diagram is not monolithically unilinear,
that there are divisions into double lines at a number of points, and that
ﬁve diªerent “houses” of Chan are speciﬁed. How can we account for
these diªerentiations, while at the same time acknowledging the “ho-
mologizing” impact of the lineage diagram and its underlying religious
assumptions? We will consider most of these examples in detail later,
but they are to a certain extent exceptions that prove the rule. It has long
been recognized that Huineng and Shenxiu, the ﬁgureheads of the so-
called Southern and Northern schools, function within traditional Chan
ideology not as two isolated individuals, but as an inextricably related
12 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
figure 2. Simpliﬁed chart of the phases of Chinese Chan.
proto-chan Bodhidharma (d. ca. 530)
ca. 500–600 Huike (ca. 485 to ca. 555 or after 574)
Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Practices
summary: Multiple locations in north China; practice based on
Buddha-nature; no known lineage theory. Known through tradi-
tional texts and a few Dunhuang documents.
early chan Hongren (601–74)
ca. 600–900 Shenxiu (606?–706), Huineng (638–713)
Shenhui (684–758)
Northern, Southern, Oxhead factions
Platform Sñtra of the Sixth Patriarch
summary: Various loosely deﬁned factions/groups, with different
approaches to “contemplation of the mind”; relationship between
this and proto-Chan unclear; lineage theories appear from 689 on 
as a unifying ideology; known through numerous Dunhuang
documents and traditional sources.
middle chan Mazu (709–88), Shitou (710–90)
ca. 750–1000 Linji (d. 867), Xuefeng Yicun (822–908)
Hongzhou and Hubei factions, antecedents of the Five Houses
Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall
summary: Emergence of“encounter dialogue” as primary mode 
of practice and discourse, recorded in colloquial form and massive
quantity in 952, and implying a genealogical model of religious culti-
vation; not present in Dunhuang documents but known through
Song dynasty texts and idealized as a golden age during Song.
song-dynasty chan Dahui (1089–1163), Hongzhi (1091–1157)
ca. 950–1300 Five Houses, Linji and Caodong schools
Blue Cliff Record
summary: Greatest ﬂourishing of Chan, which as an administrative
ideology dominated the Chinese monastic establishment; the image
ofTang-dynasty masters operating in enlightened spontaneity was
inscribed in highly ritualized Song-dynasty settings; snippets of en-
counter dialogue were collected, edited to serve as precedents of
enlightened activity, and used as topics of meditative inquiry.
note: In order to cover Chan from the end of the Song dynasty up to the present, this chart
should include at least a postclassical phase or perhaps multiple later phases. However, since the
developments of these later periods are not treated in this book, I will not attempt a periodiza-
tion here.
pair simultaneously linked in collaborative and competitive relationship.
Together they constitute a single literary and religious polarity expressed
as a relationship between two human exemplars. Aconvenient shorthand
for this complex bimodality is the French word duel,which carries the
meanings of both “duel” and “dual” in English.
14 Thus the doctrine of
sudden enlightenment associated with the Southern school cannot be ex-
plained without reference to a gradualist doctrine attributed to the North-
ern school. (This simplistic explanation of sudden versus gradual is woe-
fully inadequate in the face of historical reality, but it must have been very
effective in disabusing trainees of their simplistic notions of meditative
“achievement.”) Note that these two schools, along with Oxhead Chan,
are included together in the “early Chan” phase of the eighth century—
and this is an intentional grouping, meant to indicate that these three fac-
tions were more alike than diªerent, or at least that their religious iden-
tities were so intimately intertwined that they must be represented
together. The fact that none of Shenxiu’s disciples are included in the Chan
lineage diagram (already noticed on p. 4 above) is due to their exclusion
from consideration in traditionalistic accounts of Chan; here their mean-
ingful absence serves to highlight the unilinearity of the “orthodox” line
traced from the legendary (i.e., ﬁctional, but therefore more important)
Huineng. In chapter 6 (see p. 138) we consider whether the distinction
between the Linji/Rinzai and Caodong/Sê tê schools implies a similar po-
larity, that is, two groups paired together in a duel or binary relationship
that is both contrastive and competitive.
You might assume that the chart depicts a chain of historical causality,
but it actually characterizes the retrospective identity of the various
phases of Chan. The periodization of any set of past events represents an
act of reconstruction—not the mere reorganization and ordering of in-
formation, but the total remaking of the past as the structured image of
our imaginations. Now, there is nothing wrong with creating an image
of the past—indeed, I believe it is our task as historians, both professional
and occasional, to visualize the past in the best ways we know how. But
we should work to remain aware that the ordering of developments from
the ﬁfth through the thirteenth centuries inevitably involves this kind of
re-creation; we cannot get oª the hook with the naive belief that we are
merely ordering the information for the sake of convenience, but not re-
ally altering it in the process.
This retrospective quality pervades the Chan tradition. Time and again
we ﬁnd we are dealing, not with what happened at any given point, but
with what people thought happened previously. We deal not so much in
14 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
facts and events as in legends and reconstructions, not so much with ac-
complishments and contributions as with attributions and legacies. The
legends and reconstructions, not the supposedly “actual” events, deter-
mined later religious and social praxis. This observation may have a broad
application beyond Chinese Chan, in describing what it is that makes tra-
ditions traditions.
15 But it is certainly applicable to Chan: not true, and
therefore more important.
With these considerations in mind, then, and in order to get a better
perspective on the subjects to be covered in the remaining chapters, let
us look in somewhat greater detail at the phases listed in ﬁgure 2. At this
point I provide only a few introductory comments to help you become
oriented to the material and thus prepared for the more detailed analysis
that follows.
16
proto-chan
The designation proto-Chanrefers to the ill-deﬁned activities of a set of
practitioners surrounding Bodhidharma and Huike who were known for
their dedication to ascetic practices and meditation. Beginning roughly
around the year 500 and overlapping with the so-called early Chan phase
in the seventh and perhaps even into the eighth century, this group op-
erated in a variety of north China locations. The extent to which the in-
dividuals involved conceived of themselves as participating in a single
group or movement is unclear, and since they had no way of knowing of
the continuity of their activities with any later “Chan school,” even the
convenient term proto-Chandoes not bear close scrutiny. (Their activi-
ties are “prototypic” only to those who already know what followed.) We
know of a small number of ﬁgures who studied under Bodhidharma, and
a somewhat larger number who were primarily associated with Huike,
presumably after his master’s death. There is a certain quantity ofbiogra-
phical information about the participants in proto-Chan, and although
it attests to the variety of their backgrounds, it imparts only a shadowy
image of any shared group esprit. 
One important feature of proto-Chan—at the very least, a feature im-
portant for the subsequent evolution of the school—was its common fo-
cus on a text circulated under Bodhidharma’s name, the Treatise on the
Two Entrances and Four Practices (Erru sixing lun).As this text circulated,
practitioners who identiﬁed with Bodhidharma’s message appended their
own comments to it, making it an expanding anthology of the earliest
Chan teachings.
17Thus, while we cannot describe the scope of proto-Chan
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 15
Mount
Tài
Mount Song
(Shàolín Temple;
Shàolínsì)
Mount Zhongnán
Mount TiantáiMount
Lú
Yellow River (Huanghe)
Yángzi River (Chángjiang)
500 km0 250
Dunhuáng
Línjì
Yè
Luòyáng
Kaifeng
Cháng’an
Huángméi
Jinlíng
(Jiànyè; Nánjing)
Hóngzhou
Lín’an
(Hángzhou)
Quánzhou
Sháozhou
Cáoqi (Cáoxi)
Jiànchuan
Jingzhou
map 1. Locations for Proto-Chan, Early Chan, and Middle Chan. 
activities with any accuracy, the Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Prac-
ticesprovides insight into precisely those ideas that formed the doctrinal
nucleus of subsequent Chan practice ideology. This text describes a fun-
damental attitude of emphasis on the existence of the Buddha-nature or
potential for enlightenment within all sentient beings, as well as an atti-
tude toward how this understanding of Buddhism may be carried out in
daily life.
18
early chan
Early Chandesignates the phase when the school, or what was to become
a school eventually,19 ﬁrst articulated its lineage-based ideology in clear
and extensive form. Actually, the Dunhuang manuscripts and traditional
Chan records include an amazing variety of diªerent formulations from
this phase, and it seems evident that a great deal of experimentation was
taking place, involving a number of variations on commonly accepted
themes, as the Chan movement matured and crystallized over time. Some
of these formulations describe speciﬁc methods of contemplation prac-
tice, sometimes presented in a progressive series of steps. Others describe
the role of the Buddha-nature, or “pure mind,” within, as well as the be-
havior of the illusions—the false thoughts, or “impure mind”—that ob-
scure the appreciation of our inner purity. Compared to later Chan texts,
these formulations often seem odd but are not particularly enigmatic or
di‹cult; the emphasis at this point was on clarity in expressing this new
form of the Buddhist teaching, not on generating entirely diªerent modes
of expression.
In contrast to proto-Chan, the early Chan phase manifests a great sta-
bility of location: Daoxin and Hongren spent exactly a half-century, from
624 to 674, in the same monastic complex in Huangmei (“Yellow Plum,”
Hubei Province) and it is not unreasonable to include Shenxiu’s quarter-
century, from 675 to 701, at the not-too-distant Jade Spring Temple
(Yuquansi, in Jingzhou, which overlaps both Hubei and Hunan Prov-
inces) in this phase as well. Matters become more complex with the ex-
plosion of Chan into the two imperial capitals of Chang’an and Luoyang
during the eighth century. Therefore, whereas investigation of proto-Chan
leaves one with the impression of an indeﬁnable will-o’-the-wisp, analyz-
ing the sources for early Chan imparts a sense of continuous community
development and a growth pattern that moves from geometric increase
throughout much of the seventh century to explosive expansion in the
eighth. Also, where proto-Chan refers to a single, albeit incohesive and
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 17
ill-deﬁned, style of religiosity, early Chan may be understood as a collec-
tion of diªerent communities, groups, and factions.
In the most straightforward sense, the label East Mountain teaching
refers to both the community and doctrines of Daoxin and Hongren, but
there is an important sense in which these matters are known solely
through information transmitted by their successors. Those successors
identiﬁed themselves not as purveyors of their own doctrinal innovations,
but as transmitters of the East Mountain teaching. We need to recognize
that the ideas associated with the names Daoxin and Hongren were pri-
marily those of their followers’ later reconstruction; this recognition does
not sever the connection between those ideas and the East Mountain
teaching ﬁgureheads themselves, but it does lend an important retro-
spective quality to the process. That those successors, who were active in
Chang’an and Luoyang in the early decades of the eighth century, came
to be known by the label Northern schoolis a curious historical detail. The
Southern schoolderives from the mid-eighth-century activities of Shenhui
(684–758), although later this label came to be adopted for the Chan school
as a whole. The Oxhead schoolis a somewhat later development, a faction
or lineage that played an important historical role through its apparent
involvement in the composition of the Platform Sñtra,the hallmark and
culminating text of early Chan.
We will deal with the East Mountain teaching in chapter 2, along with
Bodhidharma and proto-Chan. The Northern, Southern, and Oxhead
schools, as the most important trends of metropolitan Chan (i.e., those
factions that evolved in the two capitals of Chang’an and Luoyang),
20will
be treated together in chapter 3. It is appropriate that the last three schools
should be taken together, since they were in dialogue with one another,
and the supposed distinctions between them in their original historical
identities are not nearly as sharp as the Chan legends would have us be-
lieve. It would also be appropriate to mark the East Mountain teaching
oª as an entirely separate phase, but I hope that adding these comments
here—and organizing chart and chapters diªerently—will be su‹cient to
show the provisional nature of the boundaries involved. The lack of con-
gruence between the categories “early Chan” and “metropolitan Chan”
as used here is intentional.
middle chan
An event of overwhelming signiﬁcance takes place in the “middle Chan”
phase: the emergence of “encounter dialogue,” the idiosyncratic manner
18 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
in which Chan masters are depicted in dialogue with their students.21As-
sociated initially with such celebrated ﬁgures as Mazu Daoyi (709–88)
and his successors Baizhang Huaihai (749–814), Nanquan Puyuan (748–
834), and Linji Yixuan (d. 867), as well as Shitou Xiqian and his succes-
sors Dongshan Liangjie (807–69) and Caoshan Benji (840–901), this is
when Chan appears to have become really Chan, when Chan masters seem
to have really behaved like Chan masters. The anecdotes of middle Chan
encounter dialogue represent the stories repeated most often in popular
books on Chan/Zen as examples of paradoxical but enlightened behav-
ior. Here the locus of religious practice was ﬁrmly removed from indi-
vidual eªort in the meditation hall and replaced by a demanding genre
of interrogation that sought to destabilize all habitual, logical patterns.
Spontaneity was the rule, iconoclastic behavior the norm.
Or so it seems. For here we will have to consider, not only the mo-
mentous import of encounter dialogue as the dominant model of reli-
gious undertaking, but also the di‹cult questions of whenall this spon-
taneous interaction was actually being practiced and whatprecisely was
going on. We will see that there is a substantial gap between when the
most famous stories of Chan lore are supposed to have happened, and
when we ﬁrst see them in written form. We will also see that these sto-
ries have complex origins, bearing features of both oral and written lit-
erature. In the past scholars (myself included) have referred to the mid-
dle phase as the “golden age” or “classical period” of Chan. The ﬁrst of
these terms may easily be discarded for its romantic coloring.
22The lat-
ter term may still be used, but only with the provision that what is be-
ing referred to is not some collection of activities and events that actu-
ally happened in the eighth through tenth centuries, but instead the
retrospective re-creation of those activities and events, the imagined iden-
tities of the magical ﬁgures of the Tang, within the minds of Song dy-
nasty Chan devotees. Mazu and the other Tang ﬁgures came to repre-
sent a classical age only when their time had passed, when their identities
were redesigned to ﬁt the needs of Song-dynasty Chan. Although mid-
dle Chan may be considered as a historical phase, “classical” Chan is it-
self a romantic depiction of activities from that phase within the later
texts of encounter dialogue. 
song-dynasty chan
The contours assumed by Chan Buddhism during the Song dynasty
represent the mature pattern which deﬁnes the tradition up until the
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 19
500 km0 250
Yellow River (Huanghe)
Yángzi River (Chángjiang)
Jin dynasty
(1115–1234)
Southern Sòng dynasty
(1127–1279)
Shu region
Jiangnánxi Dào
(Táng 618–907)
Mín (909–46)
(Southern Táng;
937–75)
î
map 2. Locations for Song-Dynasty Chan.
modern period. Using an ecological metaphor, I refer to this pattern as
a “climax paradigm,” which describes the dynamic equilibrium achieved
by a mature forest or ecological system. Earlier writers (both scholarly
and apologist) have tended to ignore this period, partly out of the wish
to explore the more “creative” masters of the Tang, or to jump across the
waters to emphasize the emerging Zen school ofJapan.The Song has also
been denigrated in general textbooks as the beginning of the decline of
Chinese Buddhism, its ossiﬁcation into institutional formalism. This at-
titude is changing, as Song-dynasty religion has become perhaps the pri-
mary focus of the study of premodern Chinese religion, by Euro-American
scholars at least. And with this change our impression of Song-dynasty
Chan has been transformed as well. It is now increasingly recognized that
the Song dynasty witnessed the emergence of a basic conﬁguration of
Chan that was disseminated throughout East Asia, and now the world.
This is apparent most dramatically in the life and teachings of Dahui Zong-
gao (1089–1163), the innovator and greatest exponent of “viewing the
critical phrase” or kê anpractice in the history of Chinese Chan. But the
picture of Song-dynasty Chan is not complete without looking closely at
the style of meditative introspection advocated by Hongzhi Zhengjue
(1091–1157) and other members of the Caodong lineage, evaluating their
recommendations on their own terms and not simply in light of the
polemical characterization by Dahui as mere “silent illumination.” Ulti-
mately, we will see that the Linji and Caodong approaches present an in-
separable pair that mimics the sudden/gradual debate of the eighth cen-
tury, and which resonates with the “two entrances” of the treatise
attributed to Bodhidharma. But this is to get ahead of our story. Let us
now turn to the legendary account of Bodhidharma himself, to see how
Chan Buddhism emerged in the ﬁrst place.
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 21
6 
Chanting the August Title of the 
Lotus Sutra: Daimoku 
Practices in Classical and 
Medieval Japan 
Jacqueline I. Stone 
THE NEW BUDDHIST movements of the Kamakura period (1185-1333) 
are known for their emphasis on simple, widely accessible practices, 
based upon faith rather than doctrinal understanding or meditative 
insight and held to be particularly suited to the capacity of persons 
living in the degenerate, Final Dharma age (mappo). Often this em- 
phasis on simple practices has been cited to support oversimplified 
descriptions of Kamakura Buddhism as a popular movement react- 
ing against the excessively complex practices and elitism of the older 
Buddhist establishments. Although not wholly inaccurate, such de- 
scriptions need to be more carefully qualified.! The simple practices 
emerged too long before the Kamakura period to be considered ex- 
clusively characteristic of that age, and even during the Kamakura 
period itself, easy accessibility of the Buddhist path to uneducated 
common people represented only one of several reasons why simple 
practices came to be widely advocated. Tracing the evolution of such 
practices thus provides an important key to uncovering the complex- 
ities in the emergence of Kamakura Buddhism and reveals numer- 
ous points of continuity, as well as nee between older and newer 
religious forms. 
Of the simple practices, chanting the nembutsu or name of the 
Buddha Amida (Skt. Amitabha) in the formula “Namu-Amida-butsu” 
has received the widest attention in the West. We have a general idea, 
for example, how this invocational or chanted nembutsu emerged 
alongside and gradually surpassed the visualization meditations and 
other contemplative forms of nembutsu being practiced within the 
Tendai sect during the Heian period (794-1185); how it was chanted 
by persons of every social rank, from court nobles hoping for birth 
116 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title WW? 
in Amida’s Pure Land to common people who were taught to chant 
it by wandering zi; how it was used for memorial prayers and as a 
protection against vengeful ghosts and other evils; and how it was 
eventually elevated to the status of an exclusive practice by Honen 
(1133-1212), who deemed it the sole gate of salvation in the Final 
Dharma age.” Less well understood, however, is the evolution of 
another, structurally similar simple practice—that of chanting the 
daimoku or title of the Lotus Sutra. This essay will explore how the 
practice emerged and developed and what the emergence and 
development of the practice may contribute to our knowledge of 
Kamakura Buddhism. 
Unlike the invocational nembutsu, the chanting of the daimoku 
seems to have had few if any Chinese precedents.’ In Japan, as is well 
known, chanting the title of the Lotus Sutra in the formula “Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo” was advocated by Nichiren (1222-1282), one of 
the leading figures in the new Kamakura Buddhist movements. Myoho- 
renge-kyo is the Japanese pronunciation of Miao-fa lien-hua ching (Scrip- 
ture of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma, T. 262.9:1-62), 
Kumiarajiva’s superb translation of the Lotus Sutra done in 406 and 
revered as authoritative throughout East Asia. Namu is a translitera- 
tion of the Sanskrit namo- (from namas) and expresses devotion, ven- 
eration, praise, or the taking of refuge—in this case, with respect to 
the Lotus Sutra. Today, the daimoku is chanted almost exclusively by 
adherents of the various denominations of Nichiren Buddhism or by 
members of those new religions that claim some link with Nichiren’s 
teaching.‘ So closely is this practice associated with Nichiren’s name 
that he is often assumed to have initiated it. This assumption may 
have been strengthened by traditional Nichiren hagiography, which 
relates how, on the twenty-eighth day of the fourth lunar month in 
the fifth year of Kencho (1253), on the morning of his first public 
sermon, Nichiren rose before dawn, climbed Mt. Kasagamori in Awa 
province and, facing eastward over the Pacific Ocean toward the ris- 
ing sun, chanted “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo!” for the first time.® Many 
people, both Nichiren Buddhists and others as well, have evidently 
understood this as meaning not only the “first time” Nichiren him- 
self chanted the daimoku but the “first time” it was ever voiced by any- 
one. However, as we shall see, Nichiren himself did not claim to have 
originated the practice of chanting the Lotus Sutras title, and in fact 
insisted that Buddhist masters of the past had chanted it before him. 
Although Nichiren’s specific claims about his predecessors may be 
open to qualification, Japanese scholarship in recent decades has 
established that Nichiren’s practice of chanting the daimoku did in- 
deed have antecedents. Moreover, within the early Nichiren commu- 
nity, this practice was understood variously, and not always in ways 

118 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
that accorded with what is considered orthodox doctrine by the 
major Nichiren denominations today. This essay will explore some 
aspects of the origins and development of the practice of chanting 
the daimoku in medieval Japan. The first part will deal with this prac- 
tice as it existed before Nichiren, assessing the current state of Japa- 
nese scholarship on this subject. The second part will examine the 
question of how the chanting of the daimoku was understood within 
the early Nichiren community. 
The Daimoku outside the Nichiren Context 
In this section, we will consider two types of evidence that shed light 
on daimoku practice outside the context of Nichiren and his commu- 
nity. First we will examine a discussion of the practice of chanting the 
daimoku that occurs in the Shuzenji-ketsu, an apocryphal work in four 
fascicles attributed to the Japanese Tendai founder Saicho (767- 
822). This text, the focus of much modern scholarly controversy, was 
in premodern times widely thought to have been known to Nichiren 
and to have influenced his formulation of the daimoku practice. 
Then we will turn to a consideration of several widely scattered refer- 
ences to the chanting or other uses of the daimoku before Nichiren’s 
time. 
The Shuzenji-ketsu Controversy 
The Shuzenji-ketsu ({Doctrinal] Decisions of Hsiu-ch’an-ssu)® was 
the first text to draw modern scholarly attention to the possibility of 
pre-Nichiren origins for the practice of chanting the Lotus Sutra’s 
title. The Shuzenji-ketsu purports to be a record of various transmis- 
sions received by Saicho during his journey to China, chiefly from 
Tao-sui at the temple Hsiu-cha’n-ssu on Mt. T’ien-t’ai. It belongs to 
the genre known as kuden homon or orally transmitted doctrines, 
texts systematizing medieval Tendai doctrines informed by notions 
of original enlightenment (hongaku). It is thought to represent an 
early stage in the development of the “great matters of the threefold 
seven categories” (sanju shichika no daiji)—the four broad categories 
of transmission and three abbreviated transmissions—that system- 
atize the orally transmitted doctrines of the Eshin school of medieval 
Tendai Buddhism.’ It also presents the most detailed discussion of 
the practice of chanting the daimoku to appear in any known medi- 
eval text outside the corpus of works belonging to the Nichiren tradi- 
tion. Other medieval Tendai texts appear possibly to refer to the 
practice of chanting the Lotus Sutra’s title, but these notices are for 
the most part brief and unclear.’ The Shuzenji-ketsu, in contrast, dis- 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 119 
cusses the daimoku at some length and offers a doctrinal explanation 
for this practice. Like most of the Tendai kuden literature, it is vir- 
tually impossible to date with accuracy; estimates range from the 
mid-eleventh to the beginning of the fourteenth century. Because 
this text for a long time represented the sole unambiguous refer- 
ence to the practice of chanting the daimoku outside of Nichiren Bud- 
dhism, its dating became a focus of considerable controversy between 
scholars of the Tendai and Nichiren sects. At stake were the issues of 
who had initiated this practice and how far Nichiren had been influ- 
enced by the Tendai establishment of his day, with which he had sup- 
posedly broken. Here let us first look at what the Shuzenji-ketsu has to 
say about chanting the daimoku and then summarize the controversy 
surrounding it, considering the implications of proposed datings. 
Several passages in the Shuzenji-ketsu discuss the chanting of the 
daimoku. The first occurs in the context of an extended discussion of 
the threefold contemplation in a single mind (isshin sangan), a cen- 
tral meditation of Tendai Buddhism whereby one contemplates in 
terms of a single thought-moment the unity of the three truths of 
emptiness, provisional existence, and the middle. According to the 
Shuzenji-ketsu, the method of this meditation should be varied in 
accordance with three distinct temporal contexts: special times, ordi- 
nary times, and the hour of death.’ Concerning the last of these, it 
states, 
The practice of this [deathbed] rite does not resemble the form of 
meditation for ordinary times. When one faces his end and the 
pain of dissolution comes upon him suddenly and wracks his body, 
his spiritual faculties are blunted, so that he is unable to discern 
things clearly. What will your learning in ordinary times avail you, 
if in your dying moments you fail to carry out the essential practice 
necessary for liberation? Therefore at this stage, one should prac- 
tice the threefold contemplation in a single mind as encompassed 
in the Dharma container (hogu). The “threefold contemplation in 
a single mind as encompassed in the Dharma container” is pre- 
cisely Myoho-renge-kyo. . . . At the time of death, one should chant 
Namu-myoho-renge-ky6. Through the workings of the three powers 
of the Wondrous Dharma [subsequently explained in considerable 
detail as the powers of the Dharma, the Buddha, and faith], one 
shall at once attain enlightened wisdom and will not receive a body 
bound by birth and death.'° 
Here we see that the daimokuis (1) presented as a practice uniquely 
appropriate to one’s final moments; (2) defined as a “meditation 
container,” whose recitation is equal to the threefold contemplation 
in a single mind; and (3) associated with faith. The latter two aspects 

120 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
suggest similarities with the teaching of Nichiren, who regarded the 
chanting of the daimoku as equivalent to meditative discipline and 
grounded it in faith. There is no evidence, however, that Nichiren 
recommended the daimoku as a practice specifically for the time of 
death, in the manner of the Shuzenji-ketsu.'! 
A second relevant passage of the Shuzenji-ketsu similarly presents 
the chanting of the daimoku as a simple form of another traditional 
Tendai meditation, in this case, the contemplation of “the single 
thought-moment comprising three thousand realms” (¢chinen sanzen) 
—standard Tendai terminology for the interpenetration and identi- 
fication of the mind (“single thought-moment”) and all dharmas 
(“three thousand realms”). This meditation, like the threefold con- 
templation in a single mind, is interpreted by the Shuzenji-ketsu in 
terms of the three temporal contexts of special times, ordinary times, 
and the time of death. Here, again, the contemplation of the single 
thought-moment comprising three thousand realms to be practiced 
at the hour of death is identified as “Myoho-renge-kyo.” “At the time 
of death,” the text reads, “one should chant Myoho-renge-kyo with a 
concentrated mind.”!? It also describes a practice in preparation for 
death in which one recites certain brief passages from the Lotus Sutra 
one thousand times, invokes the name of the bodhisattva Kannon 
(Skt. Avalokitesvara) one thousand times while profoundly contem- 
plating the bodhisattva, and also chants the title of the Lotus Sutra 
one thousand times.!° 
A third passage mentions the daimoku in the course of describing 
practice “possessing concrete form” (uso). Like the first passage cited 
above, it presents the chanting of the daimoku as a simplified form of 
the threefold contemplation in a single mind. It also associates the 
daimoku with specific objects of worship (honzon): 
The transmission concerning the Master [Tao-sui]’s profound and 
secret method of practice states, “You should make pictures of 
images representing the ten realms [of beings] and enshrine them 
in ten places. Facing each image, you should, one hundred times, 
bow [with your body], chant Namu-myoho-renge-kyo with your 
mouth, and contemplate with your mind. When you face the 
image of hell, contemplate that its fierce flames are themselves 
precisely emptiness, precisely provisional existence, and precisely 
the middle, and so on for all the images. When you face the image 
of the Buddha, contemplate its essence being precisely the three- 
fold truth. You should carry out this practice for one time period 
in the morning and one time period in the evening.'* The Great 
Teacher [Chih-i] secretly conferred this Dharma essential for the 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 121 
[beings of] dull faculties in the the last age. If one wishes to escape 
from birth and death and attain bodhi, then first he should employ 
this practice.!° 
This passage, too, offers some intriguing parallels to Nichiren’s 
thought. Its reference to the ten images suggests the calligraphic 
mandala devised by Nichiren, on which the names of representatives 
of all ten realms of beings are inscribed as manifestations of the true 
aspect of reality, represented by “Namu-myoho-renge-ky6” written 
down the mandala’s center. It also associates the chanting of the dai- 
moku with the last age, as Nichiren did. 
Today most scholars agree that the Shuzenji-ketsu is not Saicho’s 
work. Like many Tendai texts of the medieval period, it was retro- 
spectively ascribed to a great teacher of the past. But if not Saicho, 
then who did write it, and when? At what period in time were Japa- 
nese Buddhists chanting the title of the Lotus Sutra at the hour of 
their death, as this text prescribes? Does the Shuzenji-ketsu predate 
Nichiren, and if so, did Nichiren read it? Did it influence him in 
formulating his teachings concerning the daimoku and the mandala? 
Or is it a later work, representing a borrowing of Nichiren’s ideas 
back into the Tendai tradition from which he had emerged? Or—yet 
a third possibility—did the Shuzenji-ketsu and Nichiren’s thought 
emerge independently, perhaps drawing on a common source or 
sources? These questions have provoked heated argument and have 
yet to evoke scholarly consensus. 
In premodern times, when the Shuzenji-ketsu was still held to be 
Saicho’s work, many scholars within the Nichiren sect evidently 
assumed that Nichiren had drawn on it in developing his thought. 
They were no doubt confirmed in this opinion by the fact that two 
works in the corpus of writings attributed to Nichiren refer to the 
Shuzenji-ketsu by name.'® The three abbreviated transmissions of the 
Eshin school mentioned in the Shuzenji-ketsu and other medieval Ten- 
dai texts—concerning, respectively, the triple-bodied tathagata of the 
perfect teaching, the causality the Lotus, and the Land of Ever-Quies- 
cent Light—were sometimes identified in premodern Nichiren de- 
nominational scholarship with the Three Great Secret Dharmas that 
Nichiren had set forth as the core of his teaching: the object of wor- 
ship, the daimoku, and the kaidan or ordination platform.!” 
The first to challenge Saicho’s authorship appears to have been 
Shincho (1596-1659), originally a priest of the Nichiren sect who 
converted to Tendai Buddhism and seems to have entertained rather 
acrimonious feelings toward his former affiliation. In his Aindan 
Nichiren gi (Repudiating the Nichiren Doctrine), Shincho denounced 

122 . JACQUELINE I. STONE 
the Shuzenji-ketsu as a forgery and criticized doctrinal interpretations 
put forth by the Nichiren sect that were based upon it.!® 
In contrast to Shincho’s view, other, later Tendai scholars stoutly 
maintained Saicho’s authorship of the Shuzenji-ketsu and argued on 
this basis that Nichiren Buddhism owed its central practice—chant- 
ing the daimoku—to the founder of their own, Tendai sect. “In no 
respect is this a counterfeit writing,” wrote Keiko (1740-1795) of the 
Jimon branch of Tendai. Noting that the Shuzenji-ketsu, like Nichi- 
ren’s writings, advocates the chanting of the daimoku as a practice 
embodying the essence of all sutras, he added, “There is no doubt 
about it, Nichiren’s school represents a branching off of the above- 
mentioned transmission [i.e., the Shuzenji-ketsu].”!° Buddhist scholar 
Maeda Eun (1857-1930), while not personally affiliated with the 
Tendai sect, also upheld Saicho’s authorship of the Shuzenji-ketsu and 
cited Keiko’s earlier observation to underscore what he saw as the 
essentially derivative nature of Nichiren doctrine. “Even the chant- 
ing of the daimoku, the essential point underlying the founding of 
that [Nichiren] sect, had already been demonstrated by Master 
Saicho,”2° he wrote. 
The first scholar to consider the Shuzenji-ketsu in the light of mod- 
ern textual methodology was Shimaji Daito (1875-1927). Recognizing 
it to be apocryphal, Shimaji offered one of the earliest attempts at 
dating this text. In an essay published in 1922,?! he suggested con- 
nections between the Pure Land thought of the Heian period and 
the daimoku practice recommended in the Shuzenji-ketsu. The Shuzenji- 
ketsu, Shimaji pointed out, especially recommended the daimokuas a 
deathbed practice and stressed the importance of faith. In this, he 
said, it resembled the Pure Land thought expressed in the famous 
Ojoyoshu (Essentials of Birth [in the Pure Land]) by the Tendai prelate 
Genshin (942-1017), a work that had played a significant role in the 
popularization of Amidist belief and practice. The Ojaydshu mentions 
the possibility of salvation simply by chanting the nembutsu with faith 
in Amida, and also emphasizes the soteriological significance of chant- 
ing the nembutsu during one’s dying moments. Moreover, as the 
Shuzenji-ketsu does with the meditation on the mind, it distinguishes 
three temporal contexts for nembutsu practice—ordinary times, special 
times, and the time of death.?? 
After comparing the Shuzenji-ketsu with other medieval Tendai 
oral transmission literature, Shimaji placed its composition between 
about 1060 and 1128—that is, between the end of the main Fujiwara 
period (897-1086) and the beginning of the Insei or Cloister gov- 
ernment period (1086-1185).%8 This would definitely place the Shu- 
zenj-ketsu before Nichiren, and Shimaji does not appear to have 
questioned that Nichiren would have been aware of this text. Never- 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 123 
theless, he pointed out what he saw as significant differences in how 
the damoku was conceptualized in the Shuzenji-ketsu and in Nichi- 
ren’s teaching. For example, where the Shuzenji-ketsu presents the 
daimoku within a framework similar to notions of achieving birth in 
the Pure Land, Nichiren interpreted it in terms of attaining Buddha- 
hood in this very body (sokushin jobutsu). The Shuzenji-ketsu advocates 
chanting the daimoku as a practice specifically intended for the hour 
of death, while Nichiren regarded it as the fundamental practice to 
be conducted at all times. Also, where the Shuzenji-ketsu appears to 
regard the daimoku as a lesser, accommodated practice, Nichiren saw 
it as the highest form of practice, embodying the Buddha’s ultimate 
teaching. Shimaji also noted two further distinctions that, in his view, 
should be drawn between Nichiren’s teaching and medieval Tendai 
thought in general, including the Shuzenji-ketsu: (1) medieval Tendai 
represents a mixture of exoteric and esoteric doctrines and medita- 
tive practices, while Nichiren stressed exclusive devotion to the Lotus, 
and (2) where Tendai thought tends to place greater emphasis on 
doctrinal understanding and meditative insight, Nichiren established 
his practice of the daimoku on the basis of faith alone.*4 
In Shimaji’s opinion, an immediate and significant influence on 
Nichiren’s particular interpretation of the daimoku was the exclusive 
invocational nembutsu taught by Honen (1133-1212), founder of the 
Japanese Jodo or Pure Land sect. Though Nichiren criticized Honen’s 
doctrine harshly, the practices of these two teachers showed striking 
similarities, in that both recommended the repeated chanting, based 
upon faith, of a single phrase, held to contain the essence of the 
Buddha’s teaching and to open salvation to all men and women 
equally in the Final Dharma age. Several scholars have commented 
upon the possible influence of Honen on Nichiren’s thought in this 
regard.2> Shimaji argued that Genshin’s Ojoyoshu, which recom- 
mended both meditative and invocational forms of the nembutsu, 
might be likened to the Shuzenji-ketsu, which links the daimoku with 
meditative practices, while Honen’s advocacy of the single-practice 
nembutsu based upon faith alone no doubt stimulated Nichiren in 
developing his own interpretation of the dazmoku. 
Although Shimaji departed from scholars such as Keiko and Maeda 
in recognizing that the Shuzenji-ketsu was not Saicho’s work, he, too, 
judged that it predated Nichiren. Unlike Keiko and Maeda, Shimaji 
did not suggest that Nichiren owed his ideas about the dazmoku solely 
to the Shuzenji-ketsu. Nevertheless, despite the differences he pointed 
out between the Shuzenji-ketsus interpretation of the daimoku and 
Nichiren’s, or between medieval Tendai thought and Nichiren’s 
thought in general, Shimaji on the whole regarded Nichiren’s doc- 
trine as essentially a continuation of the Eshin school of medieval 

124 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
Tendai.2° Thus he concurred at least to some extent with Keiko and 
Maeda in assuming a strong influence from medieval Tendai on 
Nichiren’s thought. 
In the last several decades, certain scholars within the Nichiren 
sect have vehemently opposed such views, at least in part, it appears, 
because the presumption that Nichiren drew upon the Shuzenji-ketsu 
in developing his ideas about the daimoku has seemed to them to 
compromise Nichiren’s originality and underscore his indebtedness 
to the parent, Tendai tradition. Among the first to deny a connec- 
tion between the Shuzenji-ketsu and Nichiren was Asai Yorin (1883— 
1942), professor at the Nichirensht-affiliated Rissho University and 
a pioneer in applying the techniques of modern textual studies to 
the Nichiren canon. Asai insisted that Keiko, Maeda, Shimaji, and all 
others who maintained that Nichiren had been influenced by the 
Shuzenji-ketsu, or by the medieval Tendai oral transmission literature 
in general, were in error. Such scholars had wrongly assumed that 
the essence of Nichiren’s doctrine was expressed by those works in 
the Nichiren corpus reflecting the influence of medieval Tendai orig- 
inal enlightenment thought. However, Asai argued, these works— 
including the two that mention the Shuzenji-ketsu by name—were not 
written by Nichiren at all; rather, they represent the forgeries of later 
disciples who, influenced by their study on Mt. Hiei or at Tendai cen- 
ters in eastern Japan, had incorporated Tendai original enlighten- 
ment thought into their understanding of Nichiren’s teaching.*’ Asai 
claimed that Nichiren had drawn solely on the pure, orthodox T’ien- 
t'ai/Tendai Buddhism of the Chinese T’ien-t’ai founder Chih-i (538- 
597), the sixth T’ien-t’ai patriarch and restorer Chan-jan (711-782), 
and the founder of Japanese Tendai, Saicho, repudiating the medi- 
eval Tendai of his own day with its admixture of esoteric and Amidist 
elements. The Shuzenji-ketsu, Asai said, 
represents a jumbled doctrine that mixes esoteric thought, ideas 
of birth in the Pure Land, meditation, and the daimoku. .. . It would 
be strange if [Nichiren] Shonin, who based himself on a pure doc- 
trine of the Lotus Sutra, would have acknowledged the Shuzenji-ketsu 
—with its mixture of Lotus, esoteric, and Amidist elements—as a 
work embodying the “inner meaning of the Tendai sect.”28 
Asai’s contributions to the critical textual study of the Nichiren 
canon are enormous, but his project of isolating a “pure” Nichiren 
doctrine, untouched by medieval Tendai influences, suggests a sec- 
tarian interestedness in establishing Nichiren’s intellectual indepen- 
dence from the medieval Tendai tradition. 
Asai contented himself with arguing against a connection between 
Nichiren’s thought and that of medieval Tendai underlying the Shu- 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 125 
zenji-ketsu; he did not speculate about when the Shuzenji-ketsu had 
been written. That remained for his disciple Shigyo Kaishu (1907- 
1968), who estimated that the Shuzenji-ketsu had been compiled about 
the middle or late Kamakura period—that is, somewhere between 
the mid thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries. This would place 
it at approximately the time that Nichiren was active, or perhaps 
slightly earlier or later. A date of composition roughly contemporary 
with Nichiren would of course make it less likely that he had read 
and been influenced by the Shuzenji-ketsu than if this text had existed 
since the later Heian period. Shigyo in fact went so far as to assert 
that the new Kamakura Buddhist movements, Nichiren’s included, 
had not developed out of the Tendai original enlightenment thought 
seen in the Shuzenji-ketsu and other oral transmission texts, as Shi- 
maji and other scholars of medieval Japanese Buddhism had claimed; 
rather, mature Tendai original enlightenment thought had devel- 
oped in response to and in competition with the new Kamakura Bud- 
dhist movements.*? This suggestion of Shigyo’s remained in the realm 
of speculation, however, as he offered no concrete evidence to sup- 
port it.%° 
A more convincing argument for assigning the Shuzenji-ketsu a date 
contemporary with or after Nichiren has been offered by the late 
Tamura Yoshiro (1921-1989), a specialist in Kamakura Buddhist 
thought and the history of interpretation of the Lotus Sutra. Like 
Asai and Shigyo, Tamura attempted to draw clear lines of demarca- 
tion between Tendai original enlightenment discourse and the inter- 
pretation of that doctrine in the thought of Nichiren and other new 
Kamakura Buddhist teachers, but he pursued this task in a more his- 
torically grounded and less polemical fashion than these earlier 
scholars. Tamura accepted Shigy6 Kaishu’s proposed date of mid-to- 
late Kamakura for the Shuzenji-ketsu, but, unlike Shigyo, supported it 
with a strong argument. Basing his decision on a detailed compara- 
tive study of a number of medieval Tendai texts, Tamura proposed a 
tentative periodicization of six stages in the development and syste- 
matization of Tendai original enlightenment thought over the years 
from 1100 to 1400, assigning specific texts to different stages. Be- 
cause the Shuzenji-ketsu is one of the earliest known texts to enumer- 
ate all of the threefold seven categories of transmission into which 
the original enlightenment doctrine was eventually systematized by 
the Eshin school, Tamura assigned it to the fourth stage in his peri- 
odicization, or 1250 to 1300, the period during which he believed 
that the system of the threefold seven categories was fully elaborated. 
However, he also noted that, whereas the four broad categories of 
transmission are discussed in detail in the Shuzenji-ketsu, the three 
abbreviated transmissions are merely mentioned by name. He there- 

126 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
fore surmised that the Shuzenji-ketsu belongs to an early part of this 
stage.3! The Shuzenji-ketsu, in Tamura’s opinion, could conceivably 
represent an incorporation of Nichiren’s daimoku into a Tendai text, 
though he did not strongly argue the case.*? Among those claiming a 
date for the Shuzenji-ketsu contemporary with or after Nichiren, 
Tamura’s argument remains the best substantiated. 
Other scholars, however, still maintain—with minor qualifications 
of Shimaji Daito’s dating—that this text should be assigned to the 
later Heian. The most intriguing suggestion in this regard has been 
advanced by Buddhist historian Takagi Yutaka (1928— ),°° who adopts 
for the sake of discussion the premise that the Shuzenji-ketsu dates 
from around the Cloister government period. Takagi points out that 
the use of the daimoku as a deathbed practice, recommended in the 
Shuzenji-ketsu, resonates with the tremendous concern for dying in a 
ritually correct manner that strongly engaged Japanese Buddhists of 
the later Heian. From about the tenth century on, Buddhist belief 
that one’s dying thoughts exercise a determinative effect on one’s 
fate after death gave rise to specific deathbed practices, aimed at 
enabling one to face death with a calm and properly focused mind, 
thus escaping the round of transmigration and achieving birth in 
the Pure Land. Such practices are described in the many Oj6 den or 
“accounts of those born in the Pure Land” that were compiled dur- 
ing this period. After examining the accounts in eight collections of 
such tales compiled between 951 and 1153, Takagi determined that 
the chief of these deathbed practices was the invocational nembutsu, 
which evidently gained considerable impetus from its use in the 
deathbed setting. A less widespread form of deathbed practice 
attested to in the Ojo den was reciting the Lotus Sutra or individual 
chapters, verses, or phrases from the sutra. Those performing these 
Lotus-related deathbed practices appear to have usually been jikydsha 
—literally, “one who holds the sutra’—devotees of the Lotus, often 
monks and hiirt but also including lay persons, who relied on the 
Lotus Sutra and recited it as their personal practice. Takagi’s research 
did not unearth any accounts of individuals who chanted the dai- 
moku of the Lotus Sutra in their dying moments as the Shuzenji-ketsu 
recommends. Nevertheless, several Ojo den describe the chanting of 
short verse sections or even briefer passages from the sutra, a prac- 
tice that Takagi sees as a possible precursor to use of the daimoku in 
this setting. 
As a deathbed practice, Takagi notes, the nembutsu would have 
had major advantages over Lotus Sutra recitation. First, it would have 
been widely accessible, especially to those unable to read the sutra or 
to acquire a copy of it. This accessibility has always been a point that 
recommended the invocational nembutsu among the common people, 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 127 
for practice at ordinary times as well as at the hour of death. Second, 
whether the dying individual chanted many nembutsu or few, it could 
still be said of that person that he or she died chanting the Buddha’s 
name, an exemplary manner of death. Sutra recitation, however, 
would have carried the risk that one might die in mid-sentence or 
mid-chapter, a death that one imagines might well have been consid- 
ered unaesthetic or even inauspicious. Such a possibility would have 
rendered this practice less suitable than the nembutsu for deathbed 
use. The daimoku, however, would not have had this drawback. Takagi 
suggests that the chanting of the daimoku as a deathbed practice may 
have emerged as a response on the part of Lotus devotees to the use 
of the chanted nembutsu in the deathbed setting. The Shuzenji-ketsu 
would then represent a doctrinally systematized explanation of a 
practice that certain individuals were in fact already carrying out. 
Takagi upholds Shimaji’s conclusion that the Shuzenji-ketsu was stimu- 
lated by the strand of Pure Land thought represented in the Ojo- 
yoshu, which also divides practice into three temporal contexts and 
stresses the importance of specific deathbed observances. Both of 
these texts and the ideas they represent, he suggests, emerged from 
the same intellectual environment. 
One important question that Takagi briefly touches upon but 
does not discuss in detail is why people would have felt a need for 
deathbed practices specifically related to the Lotus Sutra, such as the 
Shuzenji-ketsu describes, rather than simply chanting the nembutsu. As 
many scholars have pointed out, the Buddhism of the Heian period 
united faith in the Lotus Sutra with aspirations for Amida’s Pure 
Land, Lotus and Amidist elements being seen as perfectly harmoni- 
ous and complementary. Monks at the great Tendai center on Mt. 
Hiei and other practitioners as well often conducted Lotus repen- 
tance rituals or other Lotus-related practices in the morning and 
Amidist observances at night—a custom that in later times came to 
be called “daimoku in the morning, nembutsu in the evening,” al- 
though at the time of which we speak, the Lotus practices in question 
do not appear to have entailed chanting the daimoku itself.** Even 
the Lotus-based deathbed rites that Takagi describes were conducted 
with the aim of achieving birth in Amida’s Pure Land, so it would 
seem as though the nembutsu should have sufficed for deathbed pur- 
poses. It has been widely observed that Buddhist practice of the Heian 
period, which generally combined devotion to Amida with Lotus 
Sutra-related observances (“one Buddha, one sutra,” as historian 
Kawazoe Sh6ji terms it), was first broken by Honen’s teaching of 
exclusive reliance on the nembutsu.?> However, we should also note 
that even earlier, there were at least some individuals who, though 
they may not have made exclusive claims, nevertheless relied solely 

128 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
on the Lotus Sutra, even in the hour of death. Ienaga Saburo has in 
fact suggested that the posture of those among the jikyosha who 
recited the Lotus as their only religious discipline may have contrib- 
uted to Nichiren’s advocacy of the daimoku as an exclusive practice.*° 
Takagi’s hypothesis about the Shuzenji-ketsw’s connection to Heian- 
period deathbed practices has yet to be confirmed, as he has found 
no independent evidence of anyone at that time chanting the dai- 
moku in their last hours.37 Nevertheless, especially when considered 
together with the similarities that Shimaji Daito pointed out between 
the Shuzenji-ketsu and the Ojoyoshu, it remains a plausible argument 
for dating the Shuzenji-ketsu before the Kamakura period. 
Another recent contribution to the debate over the Shuzenji-ketsu 
has come from Hanano Michiaki, who, endorsing Takagi’s views, 
holds that the Shuzenji-ketsu dates from around the latter part of the 
Cloister government period and influenced Nichiren’s thought.* It 
is most unlikely, in Hanano’s view, that the Shuzenji-ketsu represents 
either a reverse influence from the Nichiren sect on the Tendai tra- 
dition from which it had emerged or an apocryphon produced by 
Nichiren’s later disciples. He argues that the monks of Mt. Hiei— 
rooted as they were in the aristocracy and valuing the direct trans- 
mission of teachings from master to disciple—would scarcely have 
been open to influences from the Nichiren sect, which had its social 
and economic base among a considerably lower class of people. 
Hanano also points out that Nichiren’s later followers on the whole 
maintained his stance of exclusive devotion to the Lotus Sutra. It is 
unlikely, he argues—and his point here is well taken—that they 
would have forged something as eclectic as the Shuzenji-ketsu, which 
combines devotion to the Lotus with Amidist and esoteric elements.°? 
In Hanano’s estimation, the Shuzenji-ketsu is almost certainly the work 
of Tendai monks. 
Another contributor to the debate is Takahashi Ken’yu, who points 
out discrepancies between the Shuzenji-ketsu and authenticated works 
of Saicho with regard to the chronology of Saicho’s studies in China.‘ 
Takahashi argues that Nichiren—who, judging from his extant writ- 
ings, revered Saicho and was familiar with the facts of his biography 
—would therefore have immediately recognized the Shuzenji-ketsu as 
a forgery and rejected it out of hand. However, misdating of the 
events of Saicho’s journey to China is very common in medieval Ten- 
dai kuden texts and may have been done deliberately by the com- 
pilers to convey some tacit meaning—perhaps to distinguish these 
later documents from authentic writings of Saichd.4! Nichiren did 
indeed have a keen eye for textual problems and would probably 
have noticed the discrepancy in dates, but we cannot be certain what 
it would have signified to him or assume that he would have rejected 
the Shuzenji-ketsu solely on this account. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 129 
The above discussion by no means exhausts the opinions that 
have been put forward concerning the date of the Shuzenji-ketsu,* 
but it will have served to establish the outlines of the debate. In sum, 
the major arguments are (1) that the Shuzenji-ketsu predates Nichi- 
ren and to a greater or lesser extent contributed to the formation of 
his teaching about the daimoku; or (2) that the Shuzenji-ketsu was com- 
posed during or after Nichiren’s time, either by Tendai monks who 
appropriated the Nichiren Buddhist daimoku practice or by later dis- 
ciples of Nichiren. It is also possible that the Shuzenji-ketsu and Nichi- 
ren’s daimoku practice emerged independently, connected only 
through some earlier, common source(s). In this case, one could 
imagine that the Shuzenji-ketsu either predates Nichiren or is roughly 
contemporary with him but that he was unaware of it, or that it was 
composed about the same time as Nichiren or later but did not draw 
on his teaching. In any event, two major issues emerge here: the 
chronology of the Shuzenji-ketsu (as well as the problem of its author- 
ship), and its influence, if any, on Nichiren’s daimoku. 
As we have seen, the Shuzenji-ketsu cannot as yet be dated with cer- 
tainty. Sound arguments have been advanced for placing it in either 
the late Heian or the mid-Kamakura period. It may be that further 
studies of medieval Tendai documents will shed light on this issue. 
For it does seem, on balance, that the Shuzenji-ketsu is far more likely 
to be a Tendai text than a Nichirenist apocryphon. Apart from its 
references to the daimoku, its content is much closer to medieval 
Tendai thought than to Nichiren doctrine, and, as Hanano Michiaki 
has argued, if Nichiren’s later disciples had wished to produce a doc- 
ument legitimizing their daimoku practice by linking it with Saicho, 
they would probably have written something more reflective of Nichi- 
ren’s emphasis on exclusive devotion to the Lotus Sutra than the 
Shuzenji-ketsu.* It is conceivable, perhaps, that the Shuzenji-ketsu may 
represent an incorporation of Nichiren’s daimoku into the medieval 
Tendai tradition. Both in Nichiren’s lifetime and after his death, 
many of his disciples, some of whom had originally been Tendai 
monks, studied at or retained ties with Tendai institutions. However, 
although we have evidence that such connections resulted in the 
introduction of medieval Tendai doctrines into Nichiren thought, 
scholarship has thus far uncovered little indication of reverse appro- 
priation, from Nichiren doctrine into Tendai. And, as we shall see 
from the next section, the author(s) of the Shuzenji-ketsu could have 
derived the daimoku from sources other than Nichiren’s followers. 
Thus, although the “reverse influence” theory of the Shuzenji-ketsus 
references to the daimoku is not impossible, it awaits the support of 
concrete evidence. 
In short, the date and authorship of this important text remain a 
mystery. So does the question of its influence, if any, upon Nichiren. 

130 | JACQUELINE I. STONE 
One should note, however, that even if the Shuzenji-ketsu should pre- 
date him, that does not necessarily mean that he read it. If the two 
writings in the corpus of Nichiren’s work that refer to the Shuzenji- 
ketsu by name should be apocryphal, then we have no concrete evi- 
dence connecting Nichiren with this text. Even if these writings are 
in fact genuine, it is worth noting that they are dated 1280, two years 
before Nichiren’s death and long after he had established his daz- 
moku practice. Significantly, perhaps, the Shuzenji-ketsu is not men- 
tioned in any of his extant early works of the 1250s and 1260s, when 
he first began advocating the chanting of the daimoku. For example, 
in a personal letter dated 1264, he urges a lay follower to “simply 
chant Namu-myoho-renge-kyo, as Bodhisattva Tenjin [Vasubandhu] 
and the Great Teacher T’ien-t’ai [Chih-i] did.”44 This was at a period 
in his life when Nichiren still very much considered himself a fol- 
lower of Saicho. Had he been familiar with the Shuzenji-ketsu at this 
time, it seems likely that he would have mentioned Saicho here as 
well. 
There is room, then, to question the traditional view that the 
Shuzenji-ketsu itself directly influenced Nichiren in his thinking about 
the daimoku. Nevertheless, Nichiren began his religious career as a 
Tendai monk, and it is possible that, in his early studies as a young 
man on Mt. Hiei or through his later association with other Tendai 
clerics, he might have heard of the ideas and practices described in 
the Shuzenji-ketsu and incorporated them into his thinking. As we 
shall see below, recent scholarship has uncovered abundant evidence 
for the use of the daimoku—though not its exclusive use—before 
Nichiren’s time. Thus the question of his familiarity with preexisting 
daimoku practices no longer hinges solely on the date of the Shuzenji- 
ketsu, a fact that has somewhat blunted the polemical edge of the 
long controversy over this text. 
The Daimoku before Nichiren 
The formidable difficulties in dating the Shuzenji-ketsu and other 
medieval Tendai texts—including those that seem to hint at daimoku 
practices—mean that these documents cannot tell us with certainty 
when the practice of chanting the Lotus Sutra’ title emerged. They 
can only suggest that it may have been conducted independently of 
the Nichiren tradition. In recent decades, however, scholarship based 
on other kinds of documents has shed some light on this issue, dem- 
onstrating that the daimoku was indeed being chanted before the 
Kamakura period, though at that time it was neither uniform nor 
widespread. 
One of the first to note early references to chanting the daimoku 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 131 
was Ienaga Saburo (1913-— ), who in 1947 published evidence of this 
practice that he had found in Ojo den and sermon collections dating 
from the mid-Heian period.* Ienaga discovered the following three 
examples. First, the Shui ojo den (compiled early twelfth century) 
devotes a section to one Tachibana no Morisuke (d. 1096), who “every 
evening faced the West and, placing his palms together in reverence, 
chanted the name of [A]mida and recited the title of the Lotus 
Sutra.”*® Two other examples come from the early Cloister govern- 
ment period, in the form of tales or setsuwa related in the Hokke hya- 
kuza kikigakisho, a partial record of three hundred-day series of lec- 
tures on the Lotus Sutra held in 1110 in accordance with the vow of a 
daughter of the retired emperor Go-Sanjo. The record of the lecture 
given on the fourth day of the third month relates the story of a slow- 
witted novice monk in Sui-dynasty China who, being unable to read 
the Lotus Sutra, was taught to recite only the title. “From the moment 
the beli struck at dawn until nightfall, he chanted only ‘Namu-ichijo- 
myoho-renge-kyo [Namu to the one vehicle, the Sutra of the Lotus 
Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma].’ ” In his shame at being unable 
to read the sutra, he threw himself from a high crag. Thereupon he 
fell into hell, where horse- and ox-headed demons thrust him into a 
kettle. Hearing their iron staves strike the kettle, he mistook the 
sound for the temple bell. “ ‘I am being negligent,’ he thought, and, 
raising his voice, chanted ‘Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.’ ” At once the 
kettle broke, the boiling water in the kettle was transformed into a 
clear, cool lake, and he and everyone were seated on lotus blossoms. 
After having questioned the monk and heard his story, Yama, the 
king of hell, “rejoiced greatly and prostrated himself in reverence, 
saying, ‘Go back and chant the title of the Lotus Sutra all the more,’ ” 
and the monk was restored to life.* 
The record of the lecture given on the twenty-sixth day of the 
Sixth Month also relates how chanting the daimoku effected a mirac- 
ulous escape from hell. This story concerns one Sun-chu, a native of 
Wen-chou, of whom we are told that “there was no evil he didn’t 
commit.” Sun-chii made fun of a mendicant monk who was devoted 
to the Lotus by screwing up his mouth and chanting “Myoho-renge- 
kyo” in mocking imitation of the monk. But when Sun-chu died and 
fell into hell, King Yama declared that, although Sun-chu had ap- 
peared to be an extremely evil man, he had in fact performed an 
immense good deed. “ ‘Never yet has a person who chanted “Myoho- 
renge-kyO” a single time, whether in mockery or in earnestness, ever 
fallen into hell,’ King Yama said. ‘Go back to the saha [world] and 
embrace the Lotus Sutra with greater devotion.’ ”* 
In these examples, the chanting of the daimoku has not yet 
emerged as an independent practice in its own right and is seen as 

132 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
inferior to reciting the sutra itself. Nevertheless, these tales reflect a 
belief that the potency of the Lotus Sutra was such that even invoking 
its name was sufficient to redeem human ignorance and evil. 
lenaga gives further examples suggesting that by the latter Heian 
period, people had come to regard the sutra as an object of devotion 
whose beneficient power could be invoked in much the same way as 
that of a buddha or bodhisattva. The Liga Monogatari records that 
when his son Yorimichi lay critically ill, troubled by possessing spirits, 
the powerful courtier Fujiwara no Michinaga (966-1027) cried, “May 
the Lotus Sutra that I have served these many years help me!” The 
Konjaku Monogatari tells of a jikyosha who, when assaulted by robbers 
on the way back from a pilgrimage to Mt. Mitake, called out three 
times, “Lotus Sutra, save me!”59 The same collection also contains the 
tale of a former wet nurse who out of compassion took charge of an 
infant whose mother could not feed it. Placing her withered breast 
into the baby’s mouth, she prayed earnestly throughout the night, 
“May the Lotus Sutra that I have read these many years help me!” 
whereupon her breasts at once filled with milk.5! One can easily 
imagine how those looking to the Lotus Sutra as a source of help and 
protection would have found in the daimoku a convenient form by 
which to invoke its aid. 
The most detailed research to date on the origins of the daimoku 
has been done by Takagi Yutaka, mentioned above in connec- 
tion with his suggestions regarding the Shuzenji-ketsu. Takagi’s work 
on the origins of the daimoku in the Heian period is so vital to 
understanding the history of this practice that we shall devote the re- 
mainder of this section to summarizing it.®? Building upon Ienaga’s 
findings, Takagi has demonstrated that the words “Namu-myoho- 
renge-kyo” or similar expressions of devotion to the Lotus Sutra first 
appeared in formulaic expressions of devotion to the three treasures 
of Buddhisin, specifically, of devotion to the dharma. An extremely 
early example found by Takagi appears in connection with memorial 
services sponsored in 881 by Sugawara no Michizane for his de- 
ceased parents, which included the dedication of a new Kannon 
image, offerings to monks, and lectures on the Lotus Sutra. Michi- 
zane’s written prayer (ganmon) composed on the occasion of these 
events concludes with a conventional expression of desire for his 
parents’ enlightenment and for the transfer of merit to all living 
beings. This wish is introduced with the words “Namu-Kanzeon- 
bosatsu, Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.”®? This is the oldest authenticatible 
occurrence of the phrase “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo” to be discovered 
in Japanese sources thus far.54 
Shimaji Daito had already pointed out that use of the title of the 
Lotus Sutra in expressions of devotion to the three treasures occurs 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 133 
in certain works attributed to Genshin, author of the above- 
mentioned Ojoyoshu, and his disciples Kakuun (953-1007) and 
Kakucho (952/960-1034) .55 Shimaji mentioned specifically the Kukan 
(Contemplation of Emptiness), a brief text attributed to Genshin, 
which concludes with the statement that one who “abhors the 
impure saha world and aspires to the Pure Land of Utmost Bliss 
should chant “Namu-Amida-butsu, Namu-myoho-renge-kyo, Namu- 
Kanzeon-bosatsu.”°® This is clearly an expression of devotion to the 
three treasures, in which “Amida” represents the treasure of the 
buddha; “Myoho-renge-kyo,” the treasure of the dharma; and “Kan- 
zeon,” the treasure of the sangha. In this case, we also find it explic- 
itly stated that the daimoku is to be chanted aloud. Takagi points out 
similar occurrences of the daimoku being used to express devotion to 
the three treasures in works attributed to Kakuun.°” 
As we have seen in the case of the Shuzenji-ketsu, the medieval Ten- 
dai corpus includes many apocryphal works retrospectively attrib- 
uted to eminent scholar-monks, and it is difficult to be certain 
whether the above-mentioned texts are indeed the work of Genshin 
and Kakuun. However, Takagi notes that a reference to the daimoku 
also occurs in a recently discovered document that is verifiably the 
work of Genshin’s disciple Kakucho, the Shuzen koshiki (colophon 
dated 989). This is a liturgical writing for a ceremony Kakucho con- 
ducted in 989 and 991 for a “believers’ association for cultivating 
good” (shuzenko), which he had founded in his district as an opportu- 
nity for those participating to perform good and create merit for 
themselves, their deceased relatives, and all living beings. This text 
specifies what phrases were chanted in expression of devotion to the 
three treasures: as an expression of devotion to the dharma, the 
words “Namu-ichijo-myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the one vehicle, the 
Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma) were chanted.** 
Tagaki suggests that if the above-mentioned Kukan and the works 
attributed to Kakuun are genuine, then, together with this indisput- 
ably authentic work of Kakucho, they would constitute evidence that, 
in the late tenth and early eleventh centuries, Genshin and his disci- 
ples were intoning the daimoku on Mt. Hiei as an expression of devo- 
tion to the treasure of the dharma. 
By turning from written documents to another sort of “text,” Takagi 
has been able to document a further possible connection between 
Genshin’s lineage and the daimoku. He points out that in the year 
1007, Fujiwara no Michinaga caused to be placed in a mound on Mt. 
Kimpu in Yoshino a copy of the Lotus Sutra and other sutras that he 
had inscribed. This is the earliest fully verifiable instance in Japan of 
sutra burial, a practice associated with belief in the Final Dharma age 
and aimed at preserving the teachings throughout the degenerate 

134 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
era until the advent of Maitreya, the future Buddha. Takagi notes 
that the outer surface of the side of the lid of the cylindrical bronze 
case containing the scrolls of Michinaga’s Lotus Sutra was inscribed 
with twelve Sanskrit letters giving the Sanskrit equivalent of Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo® and that the monk who officiated as lecturer 
(koji) at the ceremony where the sutras were offered for burial was 
none other than Kakuun.® He suggests that if the daimoku were 
indeed known among Genshin’s disciples on Mt. Hiei, it might have 
reached Michinaga via Kakuun. 
In looking beyond written texts, Takagi has found additional evi- 
dence for the early use of the daimoku. He notes, for example, a 
thousand-armed Kannon image, erected in 1012 at the Koryuji in 
Kyoto for the benefit of the donor’s deceased parents, that bears in 
two places, along with the inscription “Namu-amida-butsu,” the in- 
scription “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.”°! Based on the names inscribed 
on the statue, Takagi judges that the donor was not necessarily a 
person of high rank. 
Takagi finds that up through the twelfth century, single-phrase ex- 
pressions of devotion to the Lotus Sutra had not yet crystallized as 
“Namu-myoho-renge-kyo;” instead, several different phrases were em- 
ployed. His examples include the following. A prayer inscribed by 
Sugawara no Sadayoshi in 1060 contains the phrase “Namu-Hoke- 
kyo-o” (Namu to the Lotus, king of sutras) .°* A stone monument about 
123 centimeters high, inscribed in 1064 and marking the remains of 
Josuiji Temple in Toyono in Shimo-mashiki district, Kumamoto Pre- 
fecture, is inscribed “Namu-nyoho-myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the 
Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma, [inscribed] in 
accordance with procedure).®? Fujiwara no Munetada records in his 
diary Chuyuk:, in his entry for the twenty-second day of the ninth 
intercalary month of 1118, a ceremony at which the Empress Dowager 
Fujiwara no Hiroko made offerings at the Amida Hall at Uji. Accord- 
ing to his description, at four distinct points in the ceremony, the 
monks made obeisances and intoned expressions of devotion to the 
Lotus Sutra. These expressions were “Namu-gokuraku-nan-chigt- 
myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the 
Wondrous Dharma, the utmost bliss, which is difficult to encounter), 
“Namu-kugyo-kuyo-ichijo-myoden” (Namu with reverence and offer- 
ings to the wondrous scripture of the one vehicle), “Namu-byodo- 
daie-myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the impartial great wisdom, the 
Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma), and “Namu- 
shojo-sese-chigu-myoho” (Namu to the Wondrous Dharma, to be 
encountered throughout lifetime after lifetime and age after age). 
Takagi also notes the existence of the “title chanters” (daimyésd), 
the monks who intoned the title of the sutra at public lectures on the 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 135 
Lotus Sutra or at other Buddhist ceremonies. The exact form in which 
the title was intoned is not known; perhaps, Takagi suggests, it was in 
the manner of the above-mentioned ceremony described in the Chi- 
yuki. In any event, he points out that people would have heard the 
title chanted on such occasions, a fact that might well have helped 
facilitate the spread of the daimoku as an expression of devotion to 
the Lotus. An additional piece of evidence, not noted by Takagi, is 
that one of Nichiren’s letters also contains a reference to the lec- 
turer on the Lotus Sutra chanting its title at the time of the lecture.® 
By the late twelfth century Takagi finds evidence of the daimoku 
being chanted repeatedly, in units of many thousands, in the same 
manner that the nembutsu was recited. In 1183, in accordance with a 
long-standing vow, the artist Unkei (d. 1223) had two copies of the 
Lotus Sutra transcribed with the support of a female sponsor known 
as Akomaro and two monk-calligraphers. Appended to Unkei’s colo- 
phon is a list of rathai kechiensha, those who performed ritual obei- 
sance (raihai) during the copying to gain merit and form a bond 
(kechien) with the dharma. This list includes several monks from 
Unkei’s school as well as other men and women. According to the 
colophon, Unkei calculated the number of lines copied daily and, 
for each line copied, had the male and female kechiensha bow three 
times and “chant together the august title and also the nembutsu.” 
The “august title” here evidently refers to the daimoku, for the list of 
kechiensha is followed by the statement “During the copying, the above 
persons bowed fifty thousand times and [chanted] the nembutsu one 
hundred thousand times, and the august title of the Lotus Sutra, one 
hundred thousand times.” The colophon also mentions the number 
of individual recitations performed by local people who supported 
the project: among these individuals, two lay persons chanted the 
august title and the nembutsu each three thousand one hundred times, 
and one monk, Sokei, chanted the august title of the Lotus one hun- 
dred thousand times. Takagi suggests that an emphasis beginning 
about the time of the Cloister government period on the quantity of 
nembutsu chanted is here reflected in the chanting of the dazmoku. 
Other references to chanting the daimoku that Takagi cites from 
about the same period occur in sefsuwa. One such example appears 
in a tale from the Hobutsu shu (A Collection of Treasures, compiled 
about 1177-1180). King Evil Poison, so called because of his hostility 
toward Buddhism, was inordinately fond of cattle. Wishing to save 
him from his evil, the Buddha summoned his disciples Kasyapa, Sari- 
putra, and Maudgalyayana and transformed them, respectively, into 
a cow, its owner, and a cowherd. He named the cow Myoho, the 
owner Renge, and the cowherd Kyo. The three presented themselves 
to the king, who was delighted. When he called for them, he would 

136 , JACQUELINE I. STONE 
say, “Myoho, Renge, Kyo.” After the king died and fell into hell, he 
was able to escape punishment because he had, although inadvert- 
ently, pronounced the title of the Lotus Sutra.67 Another example 
appears in the Hosshin shu (A Collection of Religious Awakenings, 
compiled about 1214-1215), a collection of setsuwa attributed to 
Kamo no Chomei (1155-1216). This story concerns a wise man who 
had a number of children. As soon as his children became capable 
of speech, he taught them to chant the title of the Lotus Sutra. As 
they grew older, he taught them more of the sutra, phrase by phrase, 
until they could repeat an entire chapter or roll. When asked why he 
did so, he explained that, should the children die young, they would 
nevertheless have formed a bond with the Lotus Sutra, the Buddha’s 
ultimate teaching; thus the opportunity provided by their having been 
born into a human existence would not have been wasted.® 
In sum, there is abundant evidence for the chanting of the davz- 
moku well before Nichiren’s time; indeed, the phrase “Namu-myoho- 
renge-kyo” is attested to as early as the late ninth century. As an ex- 
pression of devotion to the three treasures, the daimoku served to 
express veneration of the dharma, and in this form was included in 
written prayers, intoned at ceremonies, and inscribed on statues and 
monuments and the bronze cases of sutras intended for burial. It 
served as a simple phrase by which to invoke the power and protec- 
tion of the Lotus Sutra, and, although by no means as widespread as 
the nembutsu, seems to have been chanted in similar fashion by at 
least the end of the twelfth century. Moreover—if the Shuzenji-ketsu is 
a Heian-period text—it would seem that the daimoku was also used as 
a simplified form of meditation and as a deathbed practice. 
It is noteworthy, however, that the chanted daimoku of this period 
does not yet seem to have gained much momentum as a popular 
practice. The setsuwa, cited above, of the dull-witted novice who 
escaped from hell by chanting the daimoku and of the wise man who 
taught the daimoku to his young children show an awareness that this 
practice was suitable to people of limited learning. However, the 
point of these stories seems to be not the suitability of the chanting 
of the daimoku as a practice for uneducated persons, but the immen- 
sity of the Lotus Sutra’s salvific power, so great that even uttering its 
title would enable one to form a bond with the dharma and escape 
the pains of hell. Such tales would also have resonated with wide- 
spread belief that all people living in the Final Dharma age were of 
limited capacity. Commoners may have had the opportunity to hear 
the daimoku chanted at lectures and ceremonies, such as that con- 
ducted by Kakucho; the inscriptions on the thousand-armed Kannon 
noted by Takagi also suggest that it may have been known among 
people outside the aristocracy. Nevertheless, the presently available 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 137 
evidence from the Heian period in several cases connects the dai- 
moku with monks, members of the nobility, and other ranking 
persons. The daimoku may well have emerged in monastic and aristo- 
cratic circles, rather than as a direct response to the needs of the 
common people, as has often been suggested. 
As in the case of the Shuzenji-ketsujj, the question arises whether or 
not Nichiren knew of and drew upon this earlier, Heian-period 
daimoku tradition. lenaga Saburo thought not, though he acknowl- 
edged Nichiren’s conviction that the expression “Namu-myoh6-renge- 
kyo” had been used by teachers of the past. Nichiren, he noted, had 
himself written, “In our country, for seven hundred years and more 
[i.e., since the introduction of Buddhism],...there has been no 
one who chanted or encouraged others to chant Namu-myoho- 
renge-kyo in the same manner that the name of Amida is chanted. 
... [I] Nichiren alone first chanted it in the country of Japan.”®? On 
this basis, lenaga surmised that Nichiren’s daimoku had not devel- 
oped out of antecedent daimoku practices but was “re-invented” on 
the pattern of the chanted nembutsu.” 
Takagi Yutaka, however, in continuing the research Ienaga had ini- 
tiated and making additional findings, has reached a very different 
conclusion. He suggests that three major elements contributed to 
the development of Nichiren’s daimoku practice: (1) earlier daimoku 
practices of the Heian period, (2) daimoku in medieval Tendai doc- 
trine, as represented by the Shuzenji-ketsu, which Nichiren would have 
encountered during his studies on Mt. Hiei, and (3), as Ilenaga had 
suggested, Honen’s nembutsu. It was out of these three, Takagi argues, 
that Nichiren forged his unique conception of the daimoku, divorced 
from the Amidist elements often associated with it during the Heian 
period, and established it as an exclusive practice and the core of a 
new interpretation of Buddhism.” 
The evidence from Nichiren’s own writings on this issue is not 
clear-cut. It is true that Nichiren’s references to specific persons chant- 
ing the daimoku before him are generally not to contemporaries or 
even to Japanese predecessors, but to Buddhist masters of India and 
China.”2 The statement Ienaga quotes, that “Nichiren alone first 
chanted” the daimoku, would indeed seem to suggest that Nichiren 
knew of no one else in his own time chanting “Namu-myoho-renge- 
kyo.” Nevertheless, one can juxtapose this with another passage, al- 
ready referred to, in which Nichiren writes that, since the time of the 
Buddha, whether in India, China, or Japan “the dazmoku of the Lotus 
Sutra has never yet been advocated in the same manner as the name 
of Amida. Individuals have merely chanted it themselves, or when 
lecturing on the sutra, the lecturer alone chanted it.””> This would 
seem to reflect some awareness of previous daimoku practices. It also 

138 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
suggests that Nichiren saw the originality of his daimoku, not in the 
fact that he was literally the first to chant it, but in that he was the 
first to propagate it “in the same manner as the name of Amida”’— 
that is, as an exclusive practice with claims to universal validity. In 
addition, Nichiren certainly knew of at least one of the attempts being 
made to express devotion to the Lotus Sutra in a single phrase. In 
1264 he wrote a letter, quoted in the previous section, in response to 
a female disciple who had reported to him that she was chant- 
ing “Namu-ichijo-mydden” (Namu to the wondrous scripture of the 
one vehicle) ten thousand times a day. In it, he advised her that 
“though it amounts to the same thing, you should simply chant Namu- 
myoho-renge-ky6, as Bodhisattva Tenjin and the Great Teacher T’ien- 
tai did.””4 
Thus, although the relevant passages are not sufficiently explicit 
to enable a firm conclusion, Nichiren’s extant writings do convey 
some consciousness of earlier or existing daimoku practices. In addi- 
tion, Takagi’s research has shown that by Nichiren’s time, the daz- 
moku was being used in a variety of ritual contexts, although the usage 
was not widespread. When we consider that Nichiren as a young man 
spent at least twelve years studying at Mt. Hiei, Onjoji, Mt. Koya, Shi- 
tennoji, and other religious centers in and near the imperial capital, 
it seems likely that he would have encountered such practices. 
Though much of it is circumstantial, the evidence in sum suggests 
that Nichiren’s daimoku was not merely something he originated as a 
counter to the chanted nembutsu but had roots in these antecedent 
forms of Lotus devotion. 
The Daimoku of Nichiren and His Community 
With Nichiren, chanting the daimoku becomes the basis of an entire 
Buddhist system. Nichiren drew on traditional works of T’ien-t’ai 
exegesis, such as Chih-i’s Fa-hua hstian-i (Profound Meaning of the 
Lotus Sutra), which interprets the sutra’s title as containing the essence 
of the sutra itself. Namu-myoho-renge-kyo was for Nichiren the heart 
not only of the Lotus, but of all other teachings, and the seed of bud- 
dhahood itself. In his thought, it is both the core of the Buddha’s 
teaching and the uniquely valid form of Buddhist practice. One 
utterance of the daimoku, Nichiren wrote, was equivalent to reciting 
the entire sutra.”> Those who chant the daimoku will never be dragged 
down by evil karma and worldly offenses into the lower realms of 
transmigration but are sure to attain buddhahood in this very body 
or achieve birth in the Pure Land.” In Nichiren’s later writings, chant- 
ing the daimoku is presented not as a beginning step or accommoda- 
tion to those incapable of the greater practice of reciting the sutra, 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 139 
but as the highest form of practice, the ultimate of the Buddha’s 
teaching, which he had embodied in the title of the Lotus Sutra 
specifically for the Final Dharma age when people would need it 
most. The daimoku contains all good precepts and the merit gained 
by observing them.” All the practices undertaken by the Buddha 
over countless kalpas and the enlightenment he consequently 
attained are contained within the sutra’s title and “spontaneously 
transferred” to those who embrace it.78 “To practice only the seven 
characters na-mu-myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo may seem limited,” Nichiren wrote, 
“but because [the daimoku] is the teacher of all buddhas of the three 
time periods, the leader of the bodhisattvas of the ten directions, 
and the guide that enables all sentient beings to attain the Buddha 
Way, it is in fact profound.”79 
The second portion of this essay will focus not on the doctrinal 
foundations of Nichiren’s daimoku—which would require a separate 
study—but on how the practice of chanting daimoku was understood 
early in the history of the Nichiren Buddhist tradition and how it dif- 
fered from, or developed beyond, what we now know of daimoku 
practice in the Heian period. For this information we will turn not 
only to Nichiren’s better-known writings, those that are considered 
normative for Nichiren doctrinal studies, but also to his early writ- 
ings and writings that may be termed problematic, that is, texts 
attributed to Nichiren but whose authenticity has been questioned 
by modern scholars and that may be redactions or even apocryphal 
works produced by his disciples, possibly after his death but well 
before the end of the medieval period.*° By thus examining dazmoku 
practice within the early Nichiren community, we can better under- 
stand the points of both continuity and difference between this 
newly emerging tradition and earlier Buddhist forms of the Heian 
period. 
The Daimoku as Meditative Practice 
Nichiren’s Buddhism, like that of Honen, is often characterized as 
a teaching of faith, as a way of distinguishing it from the parent, Ten- 
dai tradition, characterized as a teaching of meditation. It is true that 
the chanting of the daimoku was for Nichiren, above all, an expres- 
sion of faith—faith, in this case, not in an external savior figure such 
as the Buddha Amida but in the Wondrous Dharma of the Lotus Sutra. 
Especially in his later writings, Nichiren stressed salvation through 
faith rather than through meditative insight, and this position also 
represents orthodoxy for the major Nichiren denominations today. 
Nevertheless, we need to qualify more carefully the distinction be- 
tween faith (represented by Nichiren) and meditation (represented 

140 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
by Tendai) as a way of dividing the “old Buddhism” of the Heian 
period from the “new Buddhism” of the Kamakura period. Devo- 
tional and contemplative aspects of Buddhist practice are not always 
easily or even meaningfully disinguishable, and in addition, there 
are sound historical reasons for questioning whether either Tendai 
or Nichiren Buddhism can be neatly categorized in this way. One 
such reason, which we will focus on here} is evidence that the dai- 
moku was at least occasionally taught as a meditative discipline, or as 
an accompaniment to traditional Tendai meditation, in the early 
Nichiren community. 
Nichiren himself appears to have taken this view during the first 
part of his career. Two of his authenticated early writings recom- 
mend Tendai meditative practice in conjunction with the daimoku 
for those capable of performing it. One, an essay dated 1260, reads, 
One’s constant practice should be chanting the daimoku, Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo. . .. Because ours is an age in which the ignorant 
are many, precedence is not given to the contemplation of the sin- 
gle thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. But those 
with a will to do so should by all means study and contemplate it.*! 
And in a letter to a scholar-monk disciple in 1271, shortly before 
his exile to Sado Island, Nichiren wrote, 
What should always be upon one’s lips is Namu-myoho-renge-kyo. 
What should always reside within one’s heart is the contemplation 
of the single thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. 
This is the practice and understanding of wise persons. As for the 
lay persons of Japan, one should just have them chant Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo exclusively, [for] the name [of the sutra] is in- 
variably accompanied by the virtue of its essence.*? 
However, from the period of the Sado exile (1271-1274), a critical 
turning point in Nichiren’s life and thought, references to the con- 
templation of the three thousand realms in a single thought-moment 
as an adjunct mode of practice virtually disappear from Nichiren’s 
writings. By 1277, he would write that he “did not encourage the way 
of contemplation of the single thought-moment comprising three 
thousand realms but urged only the chanting of the daimoku”® as the 
sole authentic practice for the Final Dharma age. 
Nichiren’s later works in fact present the “three thousand realms 
in a single thoughtmoment” (i.e., the realm of the Buddha’s enlight- 
enment, the perfect interpenetration of the mind and all phenom- 
ena) not as a principle to be discerned or perceived, as in introspec- 
tive meditation, but rather as a reality inherent and manifested in 
the moment of faith and chanting.’ He describes the difference, 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 141 
using the Buddhist language of his day, as one of “abstract principle” 
(ri) versus “concrete manifestation” (jz).8° That is, where traditional 
Tien-t’ai/Tendai meditation aims at perceiving through introspec- 
tive contemplation the “single thought-moment comprising three 
thousand realms” as a formless principle inherent in one’s mind, in 
Nichiren’s teaching this principle is manifested in concrete form as 
the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra. One need not, then, meditate to per- 
ceive this principle within one’s mind; such meditation is in fact 
claimed to be unsuited to the Final Dharma age. Rather, one takes 
faith in its concrete manifestation—the daimoku—and accesses it in 
the act of chanting. It is not clear, however, whether in making this 
distinction Nichiren saw his “daimoku of faith alone” as a radical 
departure from earlier meditative discipline or as a continuation of 
it in an altered, more accessible form. His writings leave room for 
both views, and later interpretations have varied considerably. 
References to the daimoku as a form of meditation also occur in 
other works traditionally attributed to Nichiren but whose authentic- 
ity has recently come under question. Such problematic or possibly 
apocryphal texts would be less useful than fully authenticated ones 
were our concern simply to establish what Nichiren himself taught. 
However, traditions are formed by others besides the founder. It is 
worth our while here to examine such problematic writings because 
some of these texts discuss the daimoku in great detail and because 
our aim is not to present an “official” interpretation of the daimoku 
but to investigate any available sources suggesting how this practice 
was understood by early Nichiren Buddhists. 
First let us look at an essay in the Nichiren collection entitled Issho 
jobutsu sho (On Becoming a Buddha in One Lifetime), which de- 
scribes the daimoku as a method of carrying out the Tendai medita- 
tive practice of “contemplating the mind” (kanjin): 
Now if you wish to put an end to beginningless birth and death 
and, this time round, attain unexcelled bodhi without fail, you must 
contemplate the subtle principle originally inherent in living 
beings. The “subtle principle originally inherent in living beings” 
is Myoho-renge-kyo. Therefore, when one chants Myoho-renge- 
kyo, that is contemplating the subtle principle originally inherent 
in living beings.*® 
It also describes chanting the daimoku as a method of purifying the 
mind of delusion, as in meditation, and revealing the inherent bud- 
dha nature: 
Even right now, the deluded mind in a single thought-moment of 
ignorance is an unpolished mirror. But if one polishes it, it will 

142 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
surely become the bright mirror that is the true suchness of the 
Dharma nature. Profoundly arouse the mind of faith and day and 
night, morning and evening, polish [the mirror of the mind] with- 
out neglect. How should one polish it? Simply chanting Namu- 
myoho-renge-ky6o is what is called “polishing.”*®” 
Here we note that faith is also emphasized. In this text, as with 
others in the Nichiren collection—and for that matter, in the Shuzen- 
ji-ketsu—‘faith” and “meditation” clearly do not represent exclusive 
conceptions of the daimoku. 
This essay has traditionally been assigned the very early date of 
1255, two years after Nichiren’s first public sermon, an event later 
regarded as marking the founding of his sect. Should the Issho jobu- 
tsu sho in fact be Nichiren’s writing, and the date of 1255 correct, it 
would represent the earliest of his surviving works to mention the 
practice of chanting the daimoku. However, Nichiren’s authorship has 
recently been questioned.*® 
Another problematic essay discussing the daimoku in the vocabu- 
lary of traditional Tendai meditation is the Ichinen sanzen homon (The 
Doctrine of the Three Thousand Realms in a Single Thought- 
Moment). This work has traditionally been dated 1258, but again, 
Nichiren’s authorship is in question.°? 
The meditation on the three thousand realms in a single thought- 
moment and the meditation method of the threefold contempla- 
tion in a single mind are both contained within the five characters 
myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo, and the five characters myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo are con- 
tained within our mind. ... Thus, when we chant Myoho-renge-kyo, 
the Buddha of original enlightenment within our mind appears.%° 
Here, as in the Shuzenji-ketsu, the daimoku is described literally as a 
“meditation container.” The Ichinen sanzen homon also discusses in 
considerable detail another simplified form of meditation recom- 
mended in several medieval Tendai texts—that of reciting three times 
a passage from the Lotus Sutra dealing with the “ten suchnesses”®! as 
a means of practicing the threefold contemplation in a single mind. 
The Ichinen sanzen homon further identifies chanting the daimoku 
with meditative practice as follows: 
Ignorant people may think it hard to understand that chanting the 
sutra’s title and contemplation are the same. Nevertheless, [chiian] 
two of T’ien-t’ai [Chih-i]’s [Mo-ho] chih[-kuan] refer to “vocalizing 
or remaining silent.”? “Vocalizing” indicates the sutra. “Remain- 
ing silent” indicates contemplation. Moreover, [chiian] one of the 
Ssu-chiao i [The Meaning of the Four Teachings] states, “Not only 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 143 
is it not a waste of effort, it is the essential by which one can accord 
with the principle.”% 
In the text of Chih-i’s famous meditation manual, the Mo-ho chih- 
kuan (Great Calming and Contemplation), the phrase “vocalizing or 
remaining silent” refers—among practices performed with the body, 
mouth, and mind—to practice with the mouth as it pertains to the 
constantly sitting samadhi, first of the four kinds of samadhi that 
Chih-i’s manual outlines. The Mo-ho chih-kuan explains that, when in 
the course of seated, silent meditation, the practitioner becomes 
tired, ill, or drowsy or is assailed by inner or outer hindrances, he 
may call upon the name of a buddha and so gain aid in clearing away 
the obstructions to his meditation.** Thus in the practice of Chih-i’s 
constantly sitting samadhi, “vocalizing,” or calling on the name of a 
buddha, serves as no more than an aid to the primary task of “re- 
maining silent” or practicing contemplation. Here, however, in the 
Ichinen sanzen homon, “vocalizing” and “keeping silent” are placed on 
an equal level, and the chanting of the daimoku thus equated with 
meditation. 
Part of the discussion of the daimoku in the Ichinen sanzen homon 
occurs in the context of a polemic against “wordless” Zen and its 
denial of the scriptural tradition, particularly against its implicit 
rejection of the Lotus Sutra. In answer to the question “whether, even 
without reading the sutra, one can attain buddhahood simply by con- 
templation of the mind-ground,” this writing insists that vocal prac- 
tice of the sutra—specifically, the chanting of its titte—forms a neces- 
sary complement to silent contemplation. “Persons of wisdom should 
practice contemplation together with reading and recitation [of the 
sutra]. Ignorant persons, though they chant the daimoku alone, will 
be encompassed within this principle.”®* Here we see that for “igno- 
rant persons,” chanting the daimoku replaces meditation, a point to be 
discussed in detail below. 
As we have seen, scholars have questioned the authenticity of the 
Issho jobutsu sho and the Ichinen sanzen homon, and these two texts may 
thus represent the ideas of certain of Nichiren’s followers, rather 
than of Nichiren himself. Nor can we be certain whether they were 
written in Nichiren’s lifetime or at some time after his death. Never- 
theless, we do know that, after Nichiren’s death, not all his followers 
understood the daimoku as a matter of pure devotionalism; some 
continued to interpret it in terms of meditative practice. One such 
was Tenmoku (1245-1337), who had become a disciple during Nichi- 
ren’s lifetime. Tenmoku interpreted the daimoku in light of the two 
kinds of Lotus samadhi of T’ien-t’ai Buddhism, established by Chih-i’s 

144 , JACQUELINE I. STONE 
teacher Hui-ssu (515-577) on the basis of the “Peaceful Practices” 
chapter of the Lotus Sutra—peaceful practices possessing characteris- 
tics and peaceful practices devoid of characteristics.*° 
Practice has two aspects. One is to chant the title [of the Lotus 
Sutra] in any of the four postures—walking, standing, sitting, or 
lying down—even with a distracted mind. This is “practice possess- 
ing characteristics” (usogyo). The “peaceful practices possessing 
characteristics” correspond to this. The other aspect is that, with 
understanding of its meaning, one chants Myoho-renge-kyo with 
one’s mouth and directly contemplates the subtle principle of the 
single thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. This is 
“practice devoid of characteristics” (musogyo). The “peaceful prac- 
tices devoid of characteristics” correspond to this. In other words, 
it does not matter whether one has wisdom or not, whether one is 
noble or base, or of high or low station, whether one breaks the 
precepts or is without precepts. If one carries out the practice of 
contemplating and reciting the five characters of the daimoku, even 
with a distracted mind, he shall directly behold the body of [Bodhi- 
sattva] Fugen [Skt. Samantabhadra]. If one who has wisdom and 
understanding devotes himself to the practice of the subtle con- 
templation of the three thousand realms in conjunction with the 
five characters myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo, he shall at once behold the body of 
Fugen. Even though practice is thus divided into two, both lead to 
the fruit of buddhahood.” 
Tenmoku’s description of the practice “possessing characteristics” 
and the practice “devoid of characteristics” appears to be closely 
modeled on Hui-ssu’s. Moreover, his interpretation of the daimoku as 
a vehicle for the visualization of the bodhisattva Fugen seems far 
closer to T’ien-t’ai meditative practices than to the daimoku of faith 
alone taught by Nichiren in his later years. 
Another medieval Nichiren monk who should be mentioned in 
this context is Mobara Nikkai (1341-1396), who interpreted Nichi- 
ren Buddhist daimoku practice in terms of the categories of Tendai 
meditation such as the “ten modes of contemplation” (jujo kampo).% 
Though they have generally remained a minor voice, contemplative 
interpretations of the daimoku have coexisted in the Nichiren tradi- 
tion along with more strongly devotional understandings down to 
the modern period.% 
If we take into account the evidence of the Shuzenji-ketsu as well as 
writings by or attributed to Nichiren and his followers, it appears 
that in the late Heian and Kamakura periods, the practice of chant- 
ing the daimoku was emerging as an adjunct or alternative to Lotus- 
centered Tendai meditative disciplines, much in the same way that 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 145 
nembutsu recitation based upon faith alone had emerged alongside, 
and eventually superceded, the various contemplative and visualiza- 
tion meditations associated with the Buddha Amida. As such, it must 
be seen as part of a larger historical process. During the Heian period, 
the four kinds of samadhi constituting the T’ien-t’ai meditation sys- 
tem introduced from China by Saicho were gradually supplemented 
and then surpassed in popularity by such tangible acts of devotion as 
reading, reciting, and transcribing the Lotus Sutra, as well as other 
devotional practices including the chanted nembutsu.'° Some of 
these practices had roots in the Tendai meditational framework it- 
self: the chanted nembutsu derived in part from the constantly walk- 
ing samadhi, the second of the four kinds of samadhi, in which one 
both contemplates the Buddha Amida and chants his name, while 
Lotus devotion formed a component of the part-walking, part-sitting 
samadhi, third of the four kinds of samadhi, in which one pays rever- 
ence to and recites the Lotus Sutra along with practicing meditation. 
Another important influence here was esoteric Buddhism, which 
emphasizes practices having vocal and visual ritual form—practice 
with body, mouth, and mind. This shift in emphasis from ri toward 2, 
as Buddhists of the time spoke of it—that is, from introspective con- 
templation to practices emphasizing vocalization and tangible devo- 
tional form—continued both within medieval Tendai and in the new 
Buddhist movements, culminating in the latter with the daimoku and 
the nembutsu presented as exclusive teachings based upon faith alone. 
Looking back over the history of Tendai and Nichiren Buddhism, 
one can say that in general the former has placed greater emphasis 
on meditative discipline and the latter on faith, but the distinction is 
far from absolute. Contemplative and devotional strands have coex- 
isted and overlapped in both traditions, and the shift in emphasis 
from introspective meditation to practices emphasizing faith and 
outward expression transcended sectarian lines. In fact, it character- 
ized much of Japanese Buddhism in the late classical and medieval 
periods. 
The Daimoku as the Practice of “Ignorant Persons” 
As we have seen, some of the Heian-period setsuwa that mention 
chanting the daimoku reflect an awareness that this practice was 
suited to people of limited capacity. In the collection of works attrib- 
uted to Nichiren, discussion of the merits of chanting the daimoku as 
a practice especially suited to “ignorant persons” achieves the status 
of a conscious discourse. But who exactly were these “ignorant per- 
sons”? Different texts in the Nichiren corpus suggest at least four dif- 
ferent ways in which this category may have been understood. 

146 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
First, “ignorance” is explicitly equated with illiteracy. The Sozai 
ichinen sho, a problematic text attributed to Nichiren and tradition- 
ally dated 1258, reads, 
Question: If an ignorant person who cannot read even a single 
word chants “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo,” what benefit is there in 
that? j 
Answer: Even in the case of an illiterate person who cannot rec- 
ognize a single character, if he has faith and chants [the daimoku], 
then among the three karmas of the body, mouth and mind, he 
first forms the merit of actions of the mouth. And if he forms this 
merit, the Buddha’s seed will be planted in his breast, and he will 
surely become a person who is liberated.!?! 
Here, chanting the daimoku is presented as especially advantageous 
to those who cannot read. 
Second, ignorance is equated with lack of capacity for meditative 
discipline. We have already seen this meaning of “ignorance” in pas- 
sages quoted earlier, for example, from the Jchinen sanzen homon: 
“Persons of wisdom should practice contemplation together with 
reading and recitation [of the sutra]. Ignorant persons, though they 
chant the daimoku alone, will be encompassed within this principle.” 
This suggests the advantages of chanting the daimoku to those who 
can neither read the sutra nor practice meditation. A similar under- 
standing of the category “ignorant persons” is seen in the passage, 
also quoted above, from Nichiren’s authenticated essay Sho Hokke 
daimoku sho: 
One’s constant practice should be chanting the daimoku, Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo. . .. Because ours is an age in which the ignorant 
are many, precedence is not given to the contemplation of the sin- 
gle thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. But those 
with a will to do so should by all means study and contemplate it.!°? 
Although the primary distinction here seems to be between those 
who can and those who cannot study and meditate, Nichiren’s asso- 
ciation of ignorance with the age (mappo) should also be noted, as it 
becomes increasingly important in his later thought. 
Third, “ignorant persons” are equated with the laity. This view 
appears in Nichiren’s pre-Sado letter to his monk-disciple Sanmi-bd, 
also quoted above: 
What should always be upon one’s lips is Namu-myoho-renge-kyo. 
What should always reside within one’s heart is the contemplation 
of the single thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. 
This is the practice and understanding of wise persons. As for the 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 147 
lay persons of Japan, one should just have them chant Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo exclusively.!% 
Fourth—and this is the understanding that dominates the Nichi- 
ren corpus—“ignorant persons” are taken to mean all those born into 
the present, Final Dharma age, for whom chanting the daimoku is the 
sole authentic path of liberation. We find this especially in Nichi- 
ren’s writings from the period of the Sado exile (1271-1274) on, for 
example, in a famous passage from his major work Kanjin honzon sho 
(1273): 
For the sake of those ignorant of the single thought-moment com- 
prising three thousand realms, the Buddha, arousing great com- 
passion, wrapped up this gem within the five characters [of the dai- 
moku} and hung it around the necks of the immature beings of the 
last age. 104 
In Nichiren’s later thought, all lesser distinctions of literate and 
uneducated, clergy and laity, are dissolved in this category of univer- 
sal “ignorance.” For him, the Final Dharma age meant a time when 
no distinctions in the form of practice should exist: “everyone, 
whether wise or foolish, should alike abandon other practices and 
chant Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.”!% 
These four conceptions of “ignorance” can be readily summed up 
in two: literal “ignorance,” as some tangible limitation on certain 
individuals’ ability to carry out traditional Buddhist disciplines, 
whether stemming from illiteracy, an inability to meditate, or lay 
status; and metaphorical “ignorance,” or the benighted condition of 
living in the Final Dharma age, an existential problem in which all 
were implicated. 
Working from Nichiren’s extant letters, Takagi Yutaka has com- 
piled information about the social composition of the early Nichiren 
community, both monks and laity, and found that Nichiren’s lay 
followers of whom we have knowledge were chiefly samurai, both 
direct vassals of the bakufu (gokenin) and their retainers, and in- 
cluded several bakufu-appointed estate stewards (jito). Others were 
local landholders engaged in farming (myoshu) and women of a class 
to have servants.!°%© These people appear to have represented a range 
of reading ability; Nichiren wrote of one devout woman that she 
“could not read a single sentence,”!”” while a few others at the oppo- 
site end of the spectrum were versed in literary Chinese. Most seem 
to have been literate at least to some degree, and Nichiren encour- 
aged those who were capable of so doing to recite portions of the 
Lotus Sutra as an auxiliary to the daimoku—a practice he himself con- 
ducted.!°8 However, Nichiren’s letters do not give us a complete pic- 

148 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
ture of his immediate community of disciples. His lay followers 
would have included not only the people to whom the letters were 
addressed but many of their retainers, relatives, servants, and others 
who composed their households. In addition, not all of Nichiren’s 
letters have survived, and there were lay followers of whom we know 
almost nothing." Among all these people, it is likely that some 
could not read, and even those whose could read the Japanese sylla- 
bary or prose written in the mixed Japanese and Chinese style (kana 
majiri bun) might have been unable to read the text of the Lotus 
Sutra. The simple practice of chanting the daimoku would have amply 
answered the religious needs of such devotees. 
Nevertheless, as Takagi’s findings demonstrate, Nichiren’s lay fol- 
lowers of whom we have knowledge were not drawn from the lowest 
stratum of medieval society, and many were in fact literate. Thus the 
“ignorant person who cannot distinguish even a single character” 
may have represented not only any actual unlettered devotees who 
had to be instructed, but also a symbolic extreme case whose salva- 
tion would guarantee the salvation of all. 
As a simple practice suited to “ignorant persons,” in both literal 
and metaphoric senses, the daimoku exhibits continuities not only 
with those Heian-period setsuwa that mention the daimoku in connec- 
tion with persons of limited understanding, but also with the prac- 
tice of invoking Amida’s name. In particular, in the claim that merely 
chanting the title of the Lotus Sutra with faith enables all persons 
equally to attain buddhahood in the Final Dharma age, we find a 
parallel to Honen’s exclusive nembutsu. Both the chanted nembutsu 
and Nichiren’s daimoku were no doubt advocated at least in part for 
the sake of uneducated common people, and, as simple alternatives 
to less accessible forms such as meditation or sutra recitation, served 
to make Buddhist practice available to a wider range of people. In 
addition, over time, the doctrine that liberation depended only on a 
simple act available to anyone would prove subversive of the clerical- 
lay hierarchy and of monasticism itself, helping to open the way for a 
strongly lay-oriented Buddhism in Japan. Nevertheless, in both Pure 
Land and Nichiren traditions of the Kamakura period, emphasis on 
a simple, exclusive religious act was not solely a matter of making 
Buddhist practice available to those of limited education. It was also 
linked to awareness of the degenerate age and its unique soteriologi- 
cal demands. The claim that the daimoku constituted the sole, abso- 
lute form of practice, universally valid and not accommodated to 
individual capacity for understanding, must have conveyed to those 
who embraced it a certainty about their personal liberation at a time 
when liberation was thought to be especially difficult to achieve. If 
everyone, even the most ignorant person, could be saved, one’s own 
salvation could not be in doubt. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 149 
Nichiren Buddhist Innovations in Daimoku Practice 
Lastly we will mention three innovations in uses of the daimoku 
practice within the Nichiren tradition that appeared during or after 
Nichiren’s lifetime. These are a concept of the daimoku as an esoteric 
mantra for realizing union with the originally enlightened cosmic 
Buddha, the use of the daimoku as a memorial prayer, and icono- 
graphic representations of the daimoku. 
THE DAIMOKU AS ESOTERIC MANTRA 
Shingon esoteric Buddhism reveres the cosmic Buddha Dainichi 
(Skt. Mahavairocana), whose body is said to be composed of the five 
universal elements of earth, water, fire, wind, and space. The same 
five elements also compose the bodies of all beings. Through the 
performance of the three mysteries—the forming of mudras or sym- 
bolic gestures with the hands or body, the chanting of mantras or 
sacred syllables with the mouth, and the meditation on sacred man- 
dalas with the mind—the practitioner is said to realize the identity of 
her or his own person with the cosmic Buddha. 
Esoteric Tendai Buddhism, which developed under the influence 
of Shingon practice, also had its primordial or originally enlight- 
ened cosmic Buddha, identified in this case with the eternal Sakya- 
muni Buddha described in the “Fathoming the Lifespan of the Tatha- 
gata” chapter of the Lotus Sutra. Medieval Tendai texts typically refer 
to this Buddha as “the unproduced triple-bodied tathagata’ (musa 
sanjin no nyorai), meaning that he possesses inherently the three 
bodies of a buddha: the manifested body (Jpn. ojin; Skt. nirmana- 
kaya), the physical body with which the Buddha appears in this world 
to save the beings; the recompense body (Jpn. hojin; Skt. sambhoga- 
kaya), or the wisdom that the Buddha has attained, conceived of asa 
“body”; and the Dharma body (Jpn. hosshin; Skt. dharmakaya), the 
Buddha as personification of ultimate truth. Like Shingon’s Daini- 
chi, the unproduced triple-bodied Buddha was regarded as transtem- 
poral, without beginning or end, immanent in all things and identi- 
fied with the cosmos itself. 
One document in the Nichiren corpus suggests the daimoku to be 
a mantra or bia (seed word) associated with this primordial Buddha. 
This is a record of secretly transmitted oral teachings on the Lotus 
Sutra attributed to Nichiren—almost certainly the work of later disci- 
ples—that describe this Buddha using the esoteric Sanskrit terms 
samayas (the mudras or hand gestures associated with the various dei- 
ties or the implements, e.g., vajras, swords, etc. with which they are 
iconographically depicted) and bijas, (the Sanskrit letters symboliz- 
ing particular buddhas or bodhisattvas) : 

150 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
The august form [of this Buddha] is the originally inherent forms 
and aspects of the ten realms [of living beings]. His samayas are 
what [these beings of] the ten realms hold. His bya is the single 
word “faith,” that is, Namu-myoho-renge-kyo just as it is. [Again, ] 
his samaya is the palms placed together [as in chanting the dav- 
moku]. Keep this secret! !1° 
Also under Shingon esoteric influence, Japanese Tendai began to 
associate the five characters of the Lotus Sutraé title with the five uni- 
versal elements comprising the body of the primordially enlightened 
Buddha, thus stressing that buddhahood is originally inherent in all 
things. Because of the difficulty of dating medieval Tendai texts, it is 
difficult at present to judge even approximately when this associa- 
tion began. It appears, for example, in the Hokke kan’yo ryaku chu 
shuku,""! an apocryphal work of indeterminate date attributed to Sai- 
cho. It also appears in certain of the problematic writings in the 
Nichiren corpus—for example, 
the five elements are earth, water, fire, wind, and space... . In the 
present [Lotus] sutra, they are opened and explained as the five 
aspects of the buddha nature and the seeds of the five wisdom 
buddhas inherent in the minds of all living beings. They are in fact 
the five characters myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo. These five characters form the 
substance of the human body. Inherent and constantly abiding, 
they are the tathagata of original enlightenment.!!” 
Carrying this discourse one step further, we find that at least one 
text in the corpus of works attributed to Nichiren recommends 
chanting the daimoku as a practice for realizing one’s identity with 
the cosmic Buddha. This text is a (some scholars say apocryphal!!8) 
letter from Nichiren to a follower named Abutsu-bo living on Sado 
Island where Nichiren had been exiled. Abutsu-bo had evidently 
asked for an explanation of the magnificent jeweled stupa of the 
Tathagata Prabhutaratna (Many Jewels) that emerges from beneath 
the earth in the eleventh chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The reply, given 
in part below, identifies the stupa with the daimoku, Myoho-renge- 
kyo, and describes chanting the daimoku as a practice for realizing 
that one is enlightened originally, that is, identical to the primordial 
Buddha: 
Now the single body of Abutsu Shonin consists of the five ele- 
ments of earth, water, fire, wind, and space. These five elements 
are the five characters of the daimoku. This being the case, Abutsu- 
bo is himself the jeweled stupa and the jeweled stupa is itself 
Abutsu-bo. Any other understanding would be profitless. .. . You 
may think you made offerings to the jeweled stupa of the Tatha- 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 151 
gata Many Jewels but that is not so; you offered them to yourself. 
One’s own person is the tathagata of original enlightenment, pos- 
sessing three bodies in one. Believing in this way, chant Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo. Then that place [where you do so] is the very 
place where the jeweled stupa dwells.!!4 
Nichiren Buddhist practice resembles in some respects the three 
mysteries of Shingon in greatly condensed form: one mandala—to 
be discussed below; one mantra—the daimoku; and one mudra—that 
is, the gassho gesture of the palms placed together in reverence, used 
while chanting the daimoku. Nichiren himself, as well as many of his 
contemporary and later disciples, had originally been trained in the 
esoteric Tendai tradition. Thus, despite Nichiren’s own hostility 
toward Shingon and its influence upon Tendai, it is not suprising 
that some esoteric elements should appear in Nichiren Buddhist 
thought concerning the daimoku. 
THE DAIMOKU AS MEMORIAL PRAYER 
Another development in the chanting of the daimoku to take place 
within the Nichiren community was the use of this practice for the 
enlightenment of the deceased. Several of Nichiren’s letters indi- 
cated that both he and his followers chanted the daimoku many tens 
of thousands of times along with recitation of the Lotus Sutra for the 
purpose of memorial prayers.'!® In one letter dated 1279, Nichiren 
also praises a follower who, on the thirteenth anniversary of his infant 
daughter’s death, had erected a stupa about sixteen feet high in- 
scribed with the seven characters na-mu-myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo. He urges, 
“Be sure to inscribe the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra on any other 
stupas [you may erect] from now on.”!!6 Today, in the various Nichi- 
ren denominations, the daimoku is still inscribed on wooden votive 
tablets (tba) used in memorializing the deceased. 
In this context we should also take note of the practice of inscrib- 
ing the daimoku on itabi, vertical stone tablets that were erected 
widely during the medieval period for votive purposes, most com- 
monly for the enlightenment of the deceased. /tabi were often in- 
scribed with the nembutsu, with Sanskrit letters representing various 
esoteric deities, or with the names of other buddhas or bodhisattvas. 
Among Nichiren Buddhists, they were inscribed with the daimoku. 
Some of these daimoku itabi bore only the inscription “Namu-myoho- 
renge-ky6,” while on others, this central inscription of the daimoku 
was flanked by the names of the two buddhas, Sakyamuni and Pra- 
bhitaratna, who sit side by side in the jeweled stupa in the Lotus 
Sutra. To these were sometimes added the names of Visistacaritra 

152 > JACQUELINE I. STONE 
(Superior Conduct) and the others of the four leaders of the bodhi- 
sattvas who, in the fifteenth chapter of the sutra, emerge from be- 
neath the earth and vow to spread the sutra in the evil latter age after 
Sakyamuni’s nirvana. Other daimoku itabi reproduce the entirety of 
Nichiren’s calligraphic mandala, discussed below. The oldest known 
daimoku itabi is preserved at the daibo of the Nichirenshu temple 
Honmonji in Ikegami, Tokyo. It is dated 1290, just eight years after 
Nichiren’s death. From the inscription, it seems to have been erected 
as a votive offering for the enlightenment of the donors’ deceased 
father 
We have already seen from the Shuzenji-ketsu that the daimoku was 
employed specifically as a deathbed practice. Within the Nichiren 
tradition, from Nichiren’s time on, we find it being offered for the 
well-being of the deceased. There is a commonality here in the asso- 
ciation with death, but a shift from chanting it merely for one’s own 
enlightenment after death to also offering it for the enlightenment 
of others. 
THE DAIMOKU AS MANDALA 
Nichiren was to our knowledge the first person to give the daimoku 
iconographic expression. Some of his early writings suggest that an 
inscription of the daimoku served his followers as a personal honzon 
or object of worship, such as this 1260 essay: 
Question: What should be the object of worship, comportment, 
and constant practice of those who believe in the Lotus Sutrar 
Answer: First of all, as to the object of worship, you may use the 
eight rolls of the Lotus Sutra, or a single roll, or one chapter, or you 
may inscribe the title and make it the object of worship. .. . As for 
comportment, always sit up straight before the object of worship. 
When outside the place of practice, you need not give preference 
to [any of the four postures—] walking, standing, sitting, or lying 
down. One’s constant practice should be chanting the daimoku, 
Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.!!8 
A personal letter to a lay follower dated 1264 similarly reads, “In your 
letter you say that three times each day you bow in reverence to the 
seven characters [of the daimoku],”!!* suggesting that an inscription 
of “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo” was enshrined as an object of worship. 
Such inscriptions no doubt represent the embryonic form of 
Nichiren’s calligraphic mandalas, which he began to inscribe from 
the time of the Sado exile on. This object of worship, called the 
Great Mandala (daimandara) or gohonzon, represents the Buddha 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 153 
wisdom manifested in all phenomena. Down its center are inscribed 
the seven characters na-mu-myd-ho-ren-ge-kyo. Surrounding this central 
inscription are the names of the two buddhas who figure in the Lotus 
Sutra, Sakyamuni and Prabhitaratna, together with those of great 
bodhisattvas from both this world and other worlds, as well as the 
names of disciples, gods, humans, dragon kings, demons, and hell- 
dwellers, representing the ten realms that constitute the categories 
of sentient beings. “Illuminated by the light of the five characters of 
the Wondrous Dharma, they display their originally inherent enlight- 
ened attributes,” Nichiren wrote.!2° Nichiren called this mandala, as 
he did the daimoku that it embodies, the “single thought-moment 
comprising three thousand realms as manifested in actuality” (jz no 
ichinen sanzen). By having faith in the daimoku and chanting it before 
this object of worship, he taught, one could in effect enter the 
mandala and participate in the enlightened reality that it depicts. 
Nichiren inscribed these mandalas for individual believers as a focus 
of personal faith and practice. More than 120 of them inscribed 
in his own hand survive to this day. They may also have been en- 
shrined in local Hokkedo or chapels for Lotus devotion where 
Nichiren’s followers met.!*! Nichiren also inscribed smaller versions 
of the mandala to be worn on the person as omamor or protective 
amulets.!?* 
The three aspects of daimoku practice discussed above—the dai- 
moku considered as esoteric mantra, offered as a prayer for the de- 
ceased, and embodied in Nichiren’s mandala—appear to be innova- 
tive uses of the daimoku found primarily, if not exclusively, within the 
Nichiren tradition. From another view, however, they represent the 
assimilation to the daimoku of other preexisting forms, functions, 
and interpretations of Buddhist devotion, such as the use of man- 
dalas, prayers for the deceased, and the idea of esoteric union with a 
cosmic Buddha. In this sense, they are very much connected to ear- 
lier practices. 
Conclusions: The Emergence of the Daimoku 
in Medieval Japan 
In elevating the chanting of the daimoku to the status of an exclusive 
practice, Nichiren assimilated to it all the beneficial functions that 
Buddhists of the medieval period expected their religion to per- 
form: realization of the Buddha nature, worldly protection, salvation 
of the deceased, eradication of sins, and birth in a pure land. His 
genius lay in his welding of sophisticated Tendai doctrines to this 
simple form of practice, thus making the Lotus tradition accessible to 

154 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
a broader spectrum of people. The simplicity and claim to all-inclu- 
siveness of Nichiren’s daimoku gave rise to multiple interpretations 
even in his early community, and this tendency has continued down 
to the present. Today, the chanting of the daimoku is variously re- 
garded as an expression of faith, a meditative discipline, and an offer- 
ing for the salvation of the dead. Lotus-based new religions stress its 
power for healing and producing worldly benefits and as a prayer for 
global peace, and at least one traditional Nichiren lineage—the 
Nakayama school based in Chiba—employs it as a tool for ritual 
exorcism. 
The daimoku practice of the Kamakura period—that is, the dai- 
moku of Nichiren and his early community—differed from that of 
the preceding era in its extensively elaborated doctrinal basis and in 
its claim to universal and exclusive validity. Nevertheless, it cannot be 
fully understood independently of its Heian antecedents. During the 
Heian period, as noted above, we find a widespread shift from com- 
plex to simpler forms of Buddhist practice and from ri to ji—that is, 
from introspective contemplation to practices involving recitation 
and tangible, ritual form. Among Lotus-related practices, alongside 
the traditional meditation methods of the Tendai sect, such practices 
as reading, reciting, and transcribing the sutra gained popularity. 
Short portions of the sutra additionally came to be chanted as ab- 
breviated forms of meditation, including the verse section of the 
“Fathoming the Lifespan of the Tathagata” chapter, the passage deal- 
ing with the ten suchnesses, and (as in the Shuzenji-ketsu) the daimoku 
itself. These shifts occurred for several reasons, including the influ- 
ence of esoteric Buddhism, whose practice is grounded in visual and 
vocalized forms; belief in the Final Dharma age and the perceived 
need for simple practices suited to the limited beings of that age; the 
rise of deathbed practices, which by the nature of their circumstances 
tended to be simple; and the spread of faith in the Lotus Sutra be- 
yond monks and aristocrats to a widening range of people, including 
those unable to acquire copies of or even read the sutra text or to 
devote themselves to meditative disciplines. The emergence of the 
practice of chanting the daimoku must be understood in the context 
of this larger historical process. Nichiren’s contribution was to pro- 
vide the daimoku with a highly developed doctrinal foundation and 
to advocate it as a single, exclusive practice. Though this universal, 
all-inclusive interpretation of the daimoku is unique to his teaching, 
the practice of the daimoku itself did not appear suddenly without 
antecedents, nor can it be understood solely as a popular practice 
offered to the common people. Like many aspects of Kamakura Bud- 
dhist practice, it is rooted in, and displays continuity with, an earlier 
tradition. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 155 
Notes 
1. Descriptions of this kind overlook the extent to which Buddhism 
before the Kamakura period was already reaching out beyond the aristoc- 
racy, especially through the activities of wbasoku and hijiri—general terms for 
monks and ascetics outside the officially sanctioned monastic organization 
—and also shugenja, or shamanistic practitioners associated with esoteric 
Buddhism. The elite-popular dichotomy also tends to reify the structure of 
medieval Japanese society into the extremes of “nobles” and “common 
people.” Many followers of the new Kamakura Buddhist movements—for 
example, those of Honen and Nichiren—were samurai, local landholders, 
estate stewards, and the like—that is, people who ranked at various points 
between these two poles. 
2. For the various roles and interpretations of the nembutsu, see, for 
example, Hori Ichiro, Folk Religion in Japan (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1968), pp. 83-139; and James C. Dobbins, Jodo Shinshu: Shin Buddhism 
in Medieval Japan (Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 
1989), pp. 18-19. For the reception of Honen’s nembutsu by different social 
classes, see Tamura Encho, Nihon Bukkyo shisoshi kenkyu, Jodokyo hen (Kyoto: 
Heirakuji Shoten, 1959), pp. 35-50. 
3. The phrase “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo,” as the title of the Lotus is most 
frequently chanted, and similar expressions occur in some Chinese T’ien- 
tai texts by or attributed to the T’ien-t’ai patriarchs Chih-i (538-597) and 
Chan-jan (711-782). On this, see Shimaji Daito, “Shodai shiso ni tsuite,” 
Toyo tetsugaku 29, 5 (May 1922) (reprinted in his Kyori to shiron [Tokyo: Meiji 
Shoin, 1931]), pp. 495-496); and Asai Endo, “Hokke shodai no genryu to 
tenkai,” Osaki gakuho 142 (December 1986): 6-7. “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo” 
also appears once in a striking tale from the T’ang-dynasty text Fa-hua ch’uan- 
chi, chiian 9, episode 11. This story tells of a woman who fell into hell for the 
sin of selling fish. On hearing that she had once performed the good act of 
listening to a lecture on the Lotus Sutra, Yama, the king of hell, agreed to let 
her return to the human world, but first offered her a view of the tortures 
that await evildoers in hell. On beholding their sufferings, she cried out 
“Namu-myoho-renge-kyo!” (or, in Chinese, “Na-mo miao-fa lien-hua ching!”), 
whereupon all the evildoers who heard her had their sins instantly eradi- 
cated and were at once reborn in the heavens (T. 2068.51:90b-c). Chitian 5, 
episode 19 of the same text also tells of a novice monk who escapes from 
hell by “reciting the title of the Lotus” (70a—b). However, these tales refer to 
single utterances of the daimoku, not to its repeated chanting as an estab- 
lished practice. 
4. One notable exception is that of Kitamura Sayo (1900-1967), founder 
of the new religion Tensho Kotai Jingu Kyo, who taught her followers to 
chant “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo” but claimed no particular association with 
Nichiren, Buddhism, or the Lotus Sutra. See The Prophet of Tabuse (Tabuse, 
Yamaguchi Prefecture: Tensho Kotai Jingu Kyo, 1954), pp. 63, 67, 107. 
5. This first chanting of the daimoku facing the morning sun is not men- 
tioned in Nichiren’s extant writings or in the Goden dodai of Nichido (1282- 

156 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
1341), one of his earliest biographies. However, it does appear in the Hokke 
honmonshu yoshé, an apocryphal work attributed to Nichiren that is thought 
to have been written about forty to fifty years after his death. See Rissho 
Daigaku Nichiren Kyogaku Kenkyujo, ed., Showa teihon Nichiren Shonin bun 
(Minobu-ché, Yamanaishi-ken: Minobusan Kuonji, 1952-1959; rev. 1988; 
hereafter STN), 3:2159. 
6. Hieizan Senshuin, ed., Dengyo Daishi zenshu (Tokyo: Sekai Seiten Kanko 
Kyokai, 1989; hereafter, DDZ), 5:69-138; or Tada Koryu et al., eds., Zendar 
hongaku ron, Nihon shiso taikei 9 (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1973), pp. 41-96. 
Shuzenji-ketsu is actually an inclusive title for two smaller, closely related 
works: the “Shuzenji soden shichu” (Personal Annotations on the Transmis- 
sions of Hsiu-ch’an-ssu, DDZ 5:69-90 or Tendai hongaku ron, pp. 42-53, in 
which it is called the Shuzenji-ketsu soden shiki) and the “Shuzenji soden 
nikki” (Diary of the Transmissions of Hsiu-ch’an-ssu, DDZ 5:91—138; Tendai 
hongaku ron, pp. 54-96). 
7. The four broad categories (koden shika no daiji or shika no dembo yoge) 
are the threefold contemplation in a single mind (isshin sangan), the mind 
and its objects (shinkyogi), the essence of calming and contemplation (shikan 
daishi), and the profound meaning of the Lotus Sutra (Hokke shingi). The 
three abbreviated transmissions (ryakuden sanka no dayi) are elaborations on 
the fourth of the broad categories, “the profound meaning of the Lotus 
Sutra,” and consist of the triple-bodied tathagata of the perfect teaching 
(engyo sanjin), the significance of the Land of Ever-Quiescent Light (jo 
jakkodo gi), and the causality of the Lotus (Renge inga). These seven categories 
are said to be “threefold” because they are presented in terms of the three 
aspects of teaching (kyo), practice (gyo), and realization (sho). A detailed ex- 
planation of the seven categories appears in Uesugi Bunshu, Nihon Tendai 
shi (Nagoya: Hajinkaku Shobo, 1935), pp. 599-712; a briefer account may 
be found in Shimaji Daito, Tendai kyogaku shi (Tokyo: Meiji Shoin, 1929; 
reprint, Tokyo: Ryubunkan, 1986), pp. 464-467. In English, see Tamura 
Kwansei, “Some Aspects of Oral Transmission in Japanese Tendai Bud- 
dhism,” Indogaku Bukkyogaku kenkyu 10, 2 (March 1962): 743-737. 
8. For example, the colophon to the Myoho-renge-kyo shutsuri shoji kechi- 
myaku gives the five characters myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo of the Lotus Sutra’ title—along 
with the passage from the “Skillful Means” chapter of the sutra dealing with 
the ten suchnesses and the verse section of the “Fathoming the Lifespan of 
the Tathagatha” chapter, both of which were often ritually recited—as essen- 
tials to be believed in wholeheartedly for freeing oneself from birth and 
death and attaining bodhi (DDZ 5:194), and the Shinnyo kan contains the 
expression “Namu-byodo-daie-ichijo-myoho-renge-ky6” (Namu to the one 
vehicle of [the Buddha’s] impartial great wisdom, the Sutra of the Lotus 
Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma) (Tendai hongaku ron, Nihon shiso taikei 9, 
p- 139). Such examples may possibly reflect the practice of chanting of the 
sutra’s title in one form or another but are not altogether clear. In addition, 
the Genshi kanjo shiki, a Tendai text of the Danna school describing the pro- 
ceedings for a particular ritual initiation, the genshi kanjo, explicitly says that 
in the course of the ceremony, the disciple receiving the transmission should 
be admonished to “single-mindedly chant Namu-myoho-renge-ky6,” but no 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 157 
further explanation of this practice is given (cited in Hazama Jiko, Nihon 
Bukkyo no tenkai to sono kicho, vol. 2: Chuko Nihon Tendai no kenkyu | 1948; 
reprint, Tokyo: Sanseido, 1974], p. 77). 
9. Practice at special times means formal practice in a secluded place, 
conducted for a fixed length of time and according to prescribed ritual. 
This section of the Shuzenji-kelsu suggests a period of seven, twenty-one, or a 
hundred days and gives detailed instructions for arranging the place of 
practice, enshrining objects of worship, and conducting the threefold con- 
templation. Practice at ordinary times can be performed while walking, stand- 
ing, sitting, or lying down and involves contemplation of the mind in the 
midst of daily activities, observing in accordance with the three truths that 
one’s momentary thoughts are simultaneously devoid of substance (empti- 
ness) yet arise in dependence upon conditions (provisional existence), 
exhibiting both aspects yet definable as neither (the middle). Practice for 
the time of death was intended for one’s last hours, traditionally held to be 
a moment of great soteriological importance, as right mindfulness at the 
moment of death was believed essential to achieve the Pure Land and not 
fall back into the realms of transmigration. 
10. DDZ5:74; Tendai hongaku ron, p. 46. The entire section of the Shuzenji- 
ketsu dealing with the threefold contemplation for one’s final hours, only 
part of which is quoted above, was at some point incorporated into the 
corpus of works attributed to Nichiren under the independent title Rinju 
isshin sangan and appears in the Showa teihon Nichiren Shonin ibun (STN) 3: 
2205-2206. 
11. Nevertheless, Nichiren’s letters do highly praise the manner of death 
of those among his followers who died chanting the daimoku. See “Ueno- 
dono gohenji,” STN 2:1490-1492, and “Myoho-ama gozen gohenji,” STN 2: 
1537. On Nichiren’s understanding of the moment of death, see Matsu- 
mura Jugon, “Nichiren Shonin ni okeru rinju soso gi,” Osaki Gakuho 144 
(March 1988): 1-12. 
12. DDZ5:87. This passage occurs in the second fascicle of the text, which 
is devoted to the transmission concerning “the mind and its objects” (shin- 
kyogi). This fascicle is virtually identical to another medieval Tendai writing, 
the Ichinen sanzen fukuchu attributed to Ennin (794-866) (Dainihon Bukkyo 
zensho [Tokyo: Suzuki Gakujutsu Zaidan, 1970-1973; hereafter DNBZ], 41: 
33-34). Although the origin and relation of the two texts are not clear, it has 
been thought that they circulated independently (see Ono Genmyo, ed., 
Bussho kaisetsu daijiten [Tokyo: Daito Shuppansha, 1933-—1936; rev. ed., 1964— 
1967], 1:153-154). Recently it has been suggested that the Fukuchu was orig- 
inally an independent text that at some point was incorporated into the 
Shuzenji-ketsu, possibly to expand the Shuzenji-ketsu’ rather brief discussion 
of the “mind and its objects” category (see Asai Endo, Shuzenji-ketsu, in Ten- 
dai hongaku ron, pp. 556, 561). It is included in the Dengyo Daishi zenshu ver- 
sion of the Shuzenji-ketsu, which is based on a Keicho-period (1596-1614) 
transcription that must also have contained it. It has, however, been omitted 
by editorial decision from the Nihon shiso tatkei version, which is based on 
two fifteenth-century transcriptions of the Shuzenji-ketsu in which this section 
is lacking. If the Fukuchu was originally an independent text, that would 

158 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
mean that not one but twe medieval Tendai documents are known to have 
recommended chanting the daimoku as a practice for the hour of death. 
13. DDZ 5:87-88. 
14. That is, for two hours twice a day. 
15. DDZ5:109; Tendai hongaku ron, pp. 71-72. 
16. These are the Totai renge sho (STN 3:2137) and the Juhachi enman sho, 
which speaks of the Shuzenji-ketsu as representing the “inner meaning of the 
Tendai sect” (3:2137, 2144). A third writing in the Nichiren collection, the 
“Nichinyo gozen gohenji,” mentions a transmission that Saicho received 
from Tao-sui in China, which has been thought to refer to the Shuzenji-ketsu 
(2:1377). As we shall see, however, some question exists about Nichiren’s 
authorship of these texts. The Shuzenji-ketsu is also quoted in the Onko kiki- 
gaki, a collection of oral teachings on the Lotus Sutra traditionally attributed 
to Nichiren but now generally regarded as the work of later disciples (3: 
2544). Here it is referred to as “the transmission of the profound purport” 
(genshiden). 
17. See, for example, the Nichiman sho of Sado Ajari Nichiman (1272- 
1360), Nichirenshu shugaku zensho (NSZ) 2:404; the Hokke honmon gukyo sho of 
Nichiryu (1385-1464), Nichiryu Shonin zenshu 11:5-6; and the Shinryu shoden 
sho of Nisshu (1532-1594), NSZ 10:232-233. Of these, the Shinryu shoden sho 
explicitly mentions the Shuzenji-ketsu as its source for the three abbreviated 
transmissions. 
18. Kindan Nichiren gi, Rissho University library ms. no. A05.31, maki 2, 
section 11. The modern Tendai scholar Uesugi Bunshu (1867-1936) also 
suggested that the Shuzenji-ketsu may be a forgery by Nichiren’s later disci- 
ples, though he stated this opinion only parenthetically and gave no reasons 
in support of it. See his Nihon Tendai shi, 1:505. 
19. Sange gakusoku, in Kinsei Bukkyo shusetsu (Tokyo: Koya Kokusho Kan- 
kokai, 1925), p. 27. 
20. Tendaishu koyo, Maeda Eun zenshu (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1931), 2:22. 
21. “Shodai shiso ni tsuite,” pp. 494-510. 
22. Ojo yoshu 2, chap 6. See also Allan A. Andrews, The Teachings Essential 
for Rebirth: A Study of Genshin’s “Ojo Yoshi” (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1973), 
pp. 75-86. 
23. “Nihon Tendai kyoseki no mondai,” Kyori to shiron, p. 332. Shimaji’s 
argument is based in part on the fact that the Shuzenji-ketsu is clearly drawn 
upon in the Kanko ruyu, a text attributed to Chujin (1065-1138). Subse- 
quent scholarship, however, has called Chujin’s authorship of the Kanko 
ruiyu into question; thus Shimaji’s dating of the Shuzenji-ketsu may be incor- 
rect. See Hazama Jiko, Nihon Bukkyo no kaiten to sono kicho, vol. 2: Chiko 
Nihon Tendai no kenkyu, p. 116. 
24. Shimaji Daito, “Shodai shiso ni tsuite,” pp. 500-502. 
25. In addition to Shimaji, see especially Ienaga Saburo, “Nichiren no 
shukyo no seiritsu ni kansuru shisoshiteki kdsatsu,” in his Chusei Bukkyo 
shisoshi bain (Kyoto: Hozokan, 1947; revised 1960), pp. 66-108; and Kawa- 
zoe Shoji, “Nichiren no shukyo keisei ni okeru nembutsu haigeki no igi,” 
Bukkyoshigaku 4, 3-4 (August 1955): 59-71 and 5, 1 (January 1956): 45-57. 
26. Shimaji Daito, Tendai kyogaku shi, p. 469. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 159 
27. Many works in the Nichiren corpus exhibiting the influence of Ten- 
dai original enlightenment thought (hongaku shiso) do not survive in Nichi- 
ren’s holograph, fail to appear in the earliest catalogues of his writings, or 
exhibit other textual problems, thus lending weight to Asai’s arguments that 
a number of these texts may be apocryphal. However, Asai’s attempt to use 
any reference to the Tendai original enlightenment doctrine in itself as 
grounds for questioning the authenticity of works attributed to Nichiren is 
not without problems. See Jacqueline Stone, “Some Disputed Writings in 
the Nichiren Corpus: Textual, Hermeneutical and Historical Problems” 
(Ph.D. diss., UCLA, 1990), esp. chap. 1. 
28. Nichiren Shonin kyogaku no kenkyu (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1945), p. 
190. Asai discusses the differences between the Shuzenji-ketsu and Nichiren’s 
thought concerning the daimoku on pp. 185-197. The specific response to 
Keiko, Maeda, and Shimaji appears on pp. 194-195. The entire sixth chap- 
ter of this book, pp. 182-373, develops the thesis that Nichiren’s thought 
differs essentially from that of medieval Tendai original enlightenment dis- 
course. 
29. Shigyo Kaishu, “Nichiren Shonin kyogaku no shisoshiteki kenkyu no 
ichi kosatsu: Toku ni chuko Tendai kyogaku o haikei toshite,” Osaki gakuho 
101 (July 1954): 46-49. 
30. A similar opinion had already been advanced more than a decade 
earlier by Tamamuro Taijo, in his Nihon Bukkyoshi gaisetsu (Tokyo: Risdsha, 
1940), pp. 239-244. According to Tamamuro, by the Kamakura period the 
Tendai sect found itself isolated by its elitist tendencies from the newly 
emerging warrior society, and its sphere of influence was threatened by the 
spread of Honen’s Pure Land teaching. As a survival strategy, Tamamuro 
suggested, Tendai monks deliberately incorporated more popularly accessi- 
ble elements into their sect’s teaching, forming a “new Tendai.” Tamamuro 
cites the use of the daimoku and of images representing the ten realms of 
beings described in the Shuzenji-ketsu as evidence of this trend. (Unlike Shi- 
gyo, however, Tamamuro placed the Shuzenji-ketsu in the early Kamakura 
period and felt that Nichiren had drawn on it in formulating his thought.) 
More recent scholarship suggests that the Tendai sect was by no means as 
quickly overshadowed by the new Kamakura movements as Tamamuro’s 
(and Shigyo’s) arguments suggest. Moreover, the Shuzenji-ketsu, being writ- 
ten in Buddhist literary Chinese, was clearly intended for a monastic reader- 
ship, and it is doubtful to what extent the practices it recommends can be 
seen as popular accommodations. 
31. In addition, the Shuzenji-ketsu does not apply the three aspects of 
teaching, practice, and realization to the entirety of the four broad catego- 
ries. This point has been noted by other scholars, who also, like Tamura, see 
the Shuzenji-ketsu as representing an early stage in the formulation of the 
threefold seven categories of the Eshin school. See, for example, Hazama 
Jiko, Chuko Nihon Tendai no kenkyu, pp. 115-117, and Asai Endo, Shuzenjr- 
ketsuin Tendai hongaku ron, p. 556. 
32. Tamura Yoshiro, Kamakura shin Bukkyo shiso no kenkyu (Kyoto: Heira- 
kuji Shoten, 1965), pp. 414-417; and idem, “Tendai hongaku shiso gaisetsu” 
in Tendai hongaku ron, pp. 532-534. 

160 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
33. The following summary is based on Takagi Yutaka, Heian jidai Hokke 
Bukkyoshi kenkyu (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1973), pp. 447-465. 
34. See Shioda Gisen, “Asa daimoku to ya nembutsu,” Osaki gakuho 103 
(June 1955): 64-68. 
35. Kawazoe Shoji, “Nichiren no shukyo keisei ni okeru nembutsu hai- 
geki no igi,” pt. 1, p. 63. 
36. lenaga Saburo, “Nichiren no shukyo no seiritsu ni kansuru shisoshi- 
teki kosatsu,” Chusei Bukkyo shisoshi kenkyu, pp. 93-94. 
37. While doing the final proofreading of this essay, I happened to find 
such a reference, although not in the Ojo den that Takagi studied. According 
to the court diary Chuyuki, Emperor Horikawa on his deathbed “first 
chanted the titles of the larger Hannya (Skt. Prajna) and Lotus sutras, as well 
as the august name of the venerable Fudo (Acala); then chanted the august 
names of Sakya[munil] and [A]mida and faced the West” (entry for the sev- 
enth month, nineteenth day of Kajo 2, or 1107; Zoho shiryo taisei 11:230b 
[Kyoto: Nozomigawa Shoten, 1965]). Here the daimoku, along with other 
invocations, was clearly chanted in a deathbed setting, thus lending weight 
to Takagi’s argument. 
38. Hanano Michiaki, “Nichiren kyogaku to Shuzenji-ketsu,” Toyo gakujitsu 
kenkyu 15, 5 (1976): 127-155. This article contains a near-exhaustive sum- 
mary of scholarship on the Shuzenji-ketsu. Hanano’s own estimate of the date 
of this text appears on p. 144. 
39. Ibid., p. 152-153. 
40. Takahashi Ken’yu, “Nichiren Shonin to Shuzenji-ketsu,” Nichiren kyo- 
gaku kenkyujo kiyo 5 (March 1978): 81-99. For example, Saicho sailed for 
China in the twentieth year of the Chen-yuan era by the Chinese calendar 
(the twenty-third year of Enryaku in Japan, or 804) and returned to Japan 
the following year. According to the Shuzenji-ketsu, however, he was in China 
in the twenty-fourth year of Chen-yuan. (In fact, there was no such year, as 
the era name was changed to Yung-chen in 805.) In addition, the Shuzenji- 
ketsu says that Saicho received a transmission concerning the teaching, prac- 
tice, and realization of “calming and contemplation” (shikan) on the third 
day of the sixth month, but he had in fact left China in the fifth month. This 
discrepancy in the dates of Saicho’s stay in China had already been noted by 
Shimaji Daito and other scholars. Takahashi gives a more detailed analysis 
of differences between authenticated writings of Saicho and the Shuzenji- 
ketsu and other medieval Tendai works, regarding the dates and contents of 
specific transmissions that Saicho is said to have received. 
41. Hanano Michiaki, “Nichiren no shodai shiso to Danna-ryu no kanjo 
genshi kuden,” in Nichiren Chugoku Bukkyo shiso to sono tenkai, ed. Misaki Ryo- 
shu (Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin, 1992), p. 133. 
42. To mention a few others advanced by leading scholars: Hazama Jiko 
(1895-1946), in a 1933 article reproduced in his Chuko Nihon Tendai no ken- 
kyu, p. 37, originally placed it in the late Heian period. In a later article 
(dated 1940), however, he revised this estimate, suggesting that the Shuzenji- 
ketsu had been compiled somewhere from the end of the early to the mid- 
Kamakura period (Chuko Nihon Tendai no kenkyu, p. 116). Hanano suggests 
that Hazama changed his mind under the influence of Asai Yorin (see 
Hanano Michiaki, “Nichiren kyogaku to Shuzenji-ketsu, p. 139). Shioda Gisen 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 161 
(1889-1964) placed the Shuzenji-ketsu in the late Fujiwara period, about the 
time of Chujin (1065-1138); see his “Shodai shiso no kontei to sono 
kiketsu,” Seeshin 29 (1955): 5. Okubo Rydjun (1915- ), in his “Shuzenji-ketsu o 
chushin to suru nisan no mondai,” Tendai gakuho 9 (October 1967): 7, sug- 
gests that the Shuzenji-ketsu was compiled after Nichiren had put forward his 
teaching of the daimoku. 
43. Takahashi Ken’yu, “Nichiren kyogaku to Shuzenji-ketsu,” p. 153. 
44. “Gassui gosho,” STN 1:293. For an assessment of the claim that 
Vasubandhu and Chih-i chanted the daimoku, see Asai Endo, “Hokke shédai 
no genryu to tenkai,” pp. 4-7. 
45. Ienaga, “Nichiren no shukyo no seiritsu ni kansuru_shisdshiteki 
kosatsu,” pp. 95-96. 
46. DNBZ, 68:519b. 
47. Kobayashi Yasunori, ed., Hokke hyakuza kikigakisho sosakuin (Tokyo: 
Musashino Shoin, 1975), pp. 59-61. Takagi Yutaka (Heian jidai Hokke Buk- 
kyoshi kenkyu, p. 432) has determined that this story is based on a similar 
Chinese tale in the T’ang-dynasty collection Fa-hua ch’uan chi, chiian 5, tale 
19. In the original story, the novice monk is not instructed to chant the 
daimoku before flinging himself from the cliff, but, in hell, he “recites the 
title of the Lotus” and is able to return to the human world (T. 51.2068:70a— 
b). This is one of the few references to chanting the daimoku in Chinese 
sources (see n. 3). 
48. Ibid., pp. 118-120. This lecture, appropriately, is commenting on a 
passage from the “Dharani” chapter of the Lotus Sutra, in which the Buddha 
praises ten female raksasas who have vowed to protect the sutra’s devotees, 
saying, “Well done, well done! For merely being able to protect one who 
receives and keeps the name of the Lotus [Sutra], your happiness shall be 
immeasurable” (Miao-fa lien-hua ching 7, T. 262.9:59b, 20-21). 
49. Nihon koten bungaku taikei (NKBT), 75:369. 
50. NKBT, 24:200. 
51. NKBT, 25:138. 
52. The following summary is based on Takagi Yutaka, Heian jidai Hokke 
Bukkyoshi kenkyu, pp. 430-447. 
53. “Kichijo-in Hokke-e ganmon,” Kanke bunso, no. 650, in NKBT, 72:599. 
54. Takagi has found two examples that may possibly be earlier but occur 
in texts that cannot be reliably dated. The Aji hishaku, which is attributed to 
Enchin and carries the date 858, concludes with the phrase “Namu-myoho- 
renge-kyo” (Chisho Daishi zenshu, 3:1195a). However, this work is very likely 
apocryphal, and thus its dating is uncertain. The Kachio engi says that the 
monk Shonyo, fourth abbot of the Kachiodera, in later life “had [people] 
chant ‘Namu-myoho-renge-kyo’ ... and contemplate ‘Namu-Amida-nyorai’ ” 
(DNBZ, 83:17b). The text itself says that Shonyo was born in 781, and the 
events that it describes may belong to the Jogan era (859-876). If so, this 
would represent the earliest known instance in Japan of the daimoku being 
actually chanted as a practice. However, the date of the Kachio engi, too, is 
unknown (Takagi, Heian jidai Hokke Bukkyoshi kenkyu, pp. 445-447). 
55. Shimaji Daitd, “Shodai shiso ni tsuite,” p. 497; and Tendai kyogaku shi, 
pii394. 
56. DNBZ, 41:125a. 

162 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
57. The Nembutsu hogo has, among its expressions of devotion to the trea- 
sure of the Dharma, the words “Namu-kaisan-kennichi-kaigon-kennon-issai- 
shuj6-kai-jObutsud6-by6d6-daiei-ichij6-myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the Sutra 
of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma, the impartial great wisdom 
that opens the three vehicles to reveal the one vehicle, that opens the [Bud- 
dha’s attainment in this] immediate [lifetime] to reveal [his attainment in 
the remotest] past, and that opens the path of buddhahood to all sentient 
beings) and “Namu-i- jisshi-gonkai-kenjitsu-hosshaku-kempon-ichijo-myoden” 
(Namu to the wondrous scripture of the one vehicle that opens the provi- 
sional and reveals the true, casting off [the Buddha’s] manifest traces to 
reveal his original [ground]) (DNBZ, 41:139b, 140a); and the Ichiitsu bodaige 
has “Namu-d6j6-shotoku-honchi-jinjin-ichijo-myoden” (Namu to the wondrous 
scripture of the profound single vehicle, the original ground realized at the 
place of enlightenment) (143c). Both these works are attributed to Kakuun. 
58. Shuzen koshiki, reproduced in Akamatsu Toshihide, Zoku Kamakura 
Bukkyo no kenkyu (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1966), p. 318. 
59. Takagi cites Takeuchi Rizo, ed., Hezan ibun, Kinsekibun hen (Tokyo: 
Tokyodo Shuppan, 1965), p. 90, as his source for this inscription. The in- 
scription itself is reproduced in Seki Hideo, ed., Kyozuka ibun (Tokyo: 
Tokyodo Shuppan, 1985), inscription no. 10, p. 7. 
60. Inoue Mitsusada, Nihon Jodokyo seiritsu shi no kenkyu (Tokyo: Yamakawa 
Shuppansha, 1956; rev. ed., 1975), p. 170, n. 20. 
61. Takeuchi Rizo, ed., Heian ibun, Kinsekibun hen, pp. 92-93. 
62. “Fujiwara Yorimichi no tame Shirakawa-in ni oite Daisojo o gasu 
myoson kyujusan ganmon,” in Honcho bunshu 46, Shinter zoho kokushi taikei, 
ed. Kuroita Katsumi (Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 1966), 33:191. 
63. Takeuchi Rizo, ed., Heian ibun, Kinsekibun hen, pp. 111-112. I have 
followed Takeuchi here in giving this inscription as “Namu-nyoho-myoho- 
renge-kyo.” Takagi gives it as “Namu-nyoho-renge-kyo”; one of these is prob- 
ably a misprint. The expression nyoho, “according to [prescribed] method,” 
was often prefixed to the names of sutras that had been copied according to 
ritual procedure. In the case of sutras intended for burial, it was also in- 
scribed before the name of the sutra on the sutra case and on the stone 
stupa erected above the burial mound. See Willa J. Tanabe, Paintings of the 
Lotus Sutra (New York and Tokyo: Weatherhill, 1988), p. 44. Though Takagi 
does not call this to our attention, if the monument at the JOsuiji—which is 
in Kyushu—was originally erected there, that would suggest that at a very 
early date the daimoku had already spread well beyond the radius of the 
capital. 
64. Chuyuki, in Zoho Shiryo Taisei Kankokai, ed., Zoho shiryo taisei 13 
(Kyoto: Nozomigawa Shoten, 1965), p. 80. f 
65. “Myomitsu Shonin goshosoku,” STN 2:1164. This has also been noted 
by Asai Endo, “Hokke shodai no genryu to tenkai,” p. 7. 
66. “Unkei gankyo okugaki,” Tokyo Daigaku ShiryO Hensanjo, ed., 
Komonjo jidai kagami, 3, 47: 76-78. 
67. Hobutsu shu, DNBZ, 91:63 b-c. 
68. DNBZ, 91:220c. 
69. “Matsuno-dono goke-ama gozen gohenji,” STN, 2:1630-1631. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 163 
70. Ienaga, “Nichiren no shuky6 no keisei ni kansuru_ shisdshiteki 
kosatsu,” p. 96. 
71. Takagi Yutaka, Heian Jidai Hokke Bukkyoshi kenkyu, pp. 464-465. 
72. The “Gassui gosho” names Vasubandhu and Chih-i as predecessors 
who chanted the daimoku (STN, 1:293). The Totaigi sho and the “Utsubusa 
nyobo gohenji” both name Chih-i and his teacher Hui-ssu (1:767; 2:1785); 
the Totaigi sho also names Saicho. The Sandai hiho bonjo ji names Vasuban- 
dhu, Nagarjuna, Hui-ssu, and Chih-i (2:1864). The authenticity of both the 
Totaigi sho and the Sandai hiho bonjo ji is in question. 
73. “Myomitsu Shonin goshdsoku,” STN, 2:1164. 
74. “Gassui gosho,” STN, 1:293. 
75. “Myoho-ama gozen gohenji,” STN, 2:1527. 
76. In his later years, Nichiren taught his followers to aspire not to the 
Pure Land of Amida, but to the “Pure Land of Eagle Peak” (Jpn. ryozen jodo), 
an apotheosis of Mt. Grdhrakitta where Sakyamuni Buddha is said to have 
preached the Lotus Sutra. This term also occurs in certain medieval Tendai 
texts. 
77. Kyogyosho gosho, STN, 2:1488. 
78. Kanjin honzon sho, STN, 1:711. 
79. “Shijo Kingo-dono gohenji,” STN, 1:635. 
80. According to Nichiren textual specialist Suzuki Ichijo, apocryphal 
writings attributed to Nichiren began to appear roughly a century after Nichi- 
ren’s death and were produced for only another hundred years or so there- 
after. See his Nichiren Shonin ibun no bunkengaku-teki kenkyu (Tokyo: Sankibo 
Busshorin, 1965), p. 8. 
81. Sho Hokke daimoku sho, STN, 1:202. 
82. Jissho sho, STN, 1:490. 
83. Shishin gohon sho, STN, 2:1298. 
84. This shift in thought reflects the increasing importance that the daz- 
moku assumed for Nichiren from the time of the Sado exile. His authenti- 
cated works written before then describe the merits of chanting the dazmoku 
merely in terms of enabling one to escape the lower realms of transmigra- 
tion and eventually attain birth in a pure land. While on Sado, however, he 
began to describe the daimoku as enabling the direct attainment of buddha- 
hood. On this see, for example, Asai Endo, “Nichiren no ibun to hongaku 
shiso” in Hongaku shiso no genryu to tenkai, Hokekyo kenkyu, ed. Asai Endo 
(Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1991), 11:290-292; and Marumo Ryusei, “Nichi- 
ren Shonin no daimoku ron: Sado zengo ni okeru soi ni tsuite,” Nichiren kyo- 
gaku kenkyujo kiyo 16 (March 1989): 37-44. 
85. For example, in the Kanjin honzon sho (STN, 1:719) and “Toki Nyudo- 
dono gohenji” (2:1522). For more detailed discussion of the concept of jz in 
Nichiren’s teaching, see Mochizuki Kanko, Nichiren kyogaku no kenkyu (Kyoto: 
Heirakuji Shoten, 1958), pp. 89-110, 118-122; and Asai Endo, “Ji no 
homon,” Nichiren kyogaku kenkyujo kiyo 13 (February 1986): 1-11. 
86. Issho jobutsu sho, STN, 1:42. 
87. STN, 1:44. 
88. Tamura Yoshiro includes it in a list of works from the Nichiren collec- 
tion in which, even though they date from Nichiren’s early period when his 

164 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
writing still reflected considerable medieval Tendai influence, “original en- 
lightenment thought is excessively emphasized or overly developed.” They 
are therefore, in Tamura’s opinion, suspect (Kamakura shin Bukkyo shiso no 
kenkyu, pp. 591-592). This is not in itself a very convincing argument, as 
Tamura does not explain what would constitute “excessive emphasis” on 
original enlightenment thought in a work from Nichiren’s early years, a 
time when he drew substantially on the original enlightenment discourse. 
Nevertheless, the text does exhibit some puzzling features. Its strong Tendai 
perspective would suggest that it belongs to the early part of Nichiren’s 
career, but its claim that chanting the daimoku is the direct practice for 
attaining buddhahood does not appear in any of Nichiren’s authenticated 
works until the time of the Sado exile. It also contains a noncritical refer- 
ence to the practice of “chanting the Buddha’s name.” If this refers to the 
invocational nembutsu, it would be a rare occurrence in Nichiren’s writings 
of any period. 
89. For a discussion of this text and the argument surrounding its 
authenticity see Stone, “Some Problematic Writings in the Nichiren Corpus,” 
pp. 135-151, 157-172. 
90. STN, 3:2036-2037. 
91. “Only a Buddha and a Buddha together can fathom the true aspect of 
the dharmas, that is to say, the suchness of their characteristics, the suchness 
of their nature, the suchness of their essence, the suchness of their power, 
the suchness of their activity, the suchness of their causes, the suchness of 
their conditions, the suchness of their effects, and the suchness of their ulti- 
mate equality from beginning to end” (T. 262.9:5c). The interpretation of 
this passage in terms of the three truths derives from Chih-i, who, by trans- 
posing the punctuation of the Chinese text, construed the passage three dif- 
ferent ways to yield, respectively, the meanings of emptiness, provisional 
existence, and the middle (Fa-hua hstian4, T. 1716.33:693b, 9-26). See also 
the translation of this passage from the Fa-hua hstian-i in Paul L. Swanson, 
Foundation of Ten-t’ai Philosophy: The Flowering of the Two Truths Theory in Chi- 
nese Buddhism (Berkeley, Calif.: Asian Humanities Press, 1989), pp. 180-181. 
92. See T191146:11b79=215 
93. STN, 3:2037. The quote from the Ssu-chiao i appears at T. 1929.46: 
725b, 6-7. 
94. T. 1911.46:11b. See also Neal Donner and Daniel B. Stevenson, The 
Great Calming and Contemplation: A Study and Annotated Translation of Chih-i’s 
Mo-ho chih-kuan, Kuroda Institute Classics in East Asian Buddhism (Hono- 
lulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 1993), pp. 224-225; and Daniel B. Steven- 
son, “The Four Kinds of Samadhi in Early T’ien-t’ai Buddhism,” in Traditions 
of Meditation in Chinese Buddhism, ed. Peter N. Gregory, Kuroda Institute 
Studies in East Asian Buddhism, no. 4 (Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i 
Press, 1986), pp. 56-57. 
95. STN, 3:2038. 
96. Fa-hua ching an-lo-hsing i, T. 1926.46:700a. These two forms of Lotus 
samadhi were incorporated by Chih-i into the part-walking, part-sitting sama- 
dhi, the third of the four kinds of samadhi outlined in his Mo-ho chih-kuan. 
See also Stevenson, “The Four Kinds of Samadhi in Early T’ien-t’ai Bud- 
dhism,” pp. 67-72. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 165 
97. Engoku jitsugi sho, Nichirenshu shugaku zensho, 1:81. 
98. See the discussion of Nikkai’s thought in Watanabe Hoyo, Nichirenshu 
shingyoron no kenkyu (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1976), pp. 158-174. 
99. On this subject see Watanabe Hoyo, “Nichiren kyogaku ni okeru san- 
mai no mondai,” Nihon Bukkyo gakkai nempyo 41 (March 1976): 339-351. 
100. See, for example, Shioda Gisen, “Asa daimoku to ya nembutsu,” pp. 
66-67; and Asai Endo, “Nichiren no kyogaku to hongaku shiso,” pp. 293- 
Zon 
101. STN, 1:84-85. 
102. STN; 1:202. 
103. Jissho sho, STN, 1:490. 
104. STN, 1:720. 
105. Hoon sho, STN, 2:1248. 
106. Takagi Yutaka, Nichiren to sono montei (Tokyo: Kobundo, 1965), pp. 
67-81. 
107. “Ben-dono ama gozen gosho,” STN, 1:752. 
108. See, for example, Otani Gyoko, “Nichiren Shonin ni okeru sensho 
daimoku to yogyo no jissen: Toku ni dokuju o chushin toshite,” Indogaku buk- 
kyogaku kenkyu (March 1975): 432-434. Otani focuses on Nichiren’s writings 
from the period of his retirement on Mt. Minobu (1274-1282); an earlier 
instance of Nichiren recommending sutra recitation along with chanting 
the daimoku occurs in the “Gassui gosho,” STN, 1:290, dated 1264. 
109. One intriguing group of disciples is those for whom Nichiren in- 
scribed mandalas as objects of worship (honzon), but of whom nothing else 
is recorded. Of forty-nine lay followers known to have received mandalas 
from Nichiren, only about 10 percent additionally received letters from him 
that have survived and that give us further information about them. See 
Takagi Yutaka, Nichiren to sono montei, pp. 68, 78, n. 5. 
110. Ongi kuden, STN, 3:2672. 
DELS DDZ,.52293. 
112. Sanze shobutsu sokanmon kyoso hairyu, STN, 2:1697. 
113. For a summary of the questions surrounding its authenticity, see 
Stone, “Some Disputed Writings in the Nichiren Corpus,” p. 243. 
114. “Abutsu-bo gosho,” STN, 2:1145. One passage from the Shuzenji-ketsu 
similarly suggests that “chanting the single name myo [of Myoho-renge-kyo]” 
can serve as an esoteric practice for achieving union with Dainichi (Tendai 
hongaku ron, p. 77; DDZ, 5:115). 
115. See, for example, “Utsubusa nyobo gohenji,” STN, 2:1784; and 
“Ueno-dono haha ama gozen gohenji,” STN, 2:1810. 
116. “Nakaoki Nyudo goshosoku,” STN, 2:1718-1719. 
117. On daimoku itabi, see Ishimura Kiei, “Daimoku, myogo, jusanbutsu 
itabi,” in Itabi no sogo kenkyu, ed. Sakazume Shuichi (Tokyo: Haku Shobo, 
1983), pp. 120-129; and Chijiwa Itaru, Jtabi to sono jidai: tejika na bunkazai, 
mijika na chusei (Tokyo: Heibonsha, 1988), pp. 158-169. The description of 
the oldest known daimoku itabi appears in Chijiwa, pp. 162-165. The stone 
monument inscribed with a variant of the daimoku at the Josuiji, noted by 
Takagi and mentioned above, suggests itself as an antecedent to these medi- 
eval ttabi. 
118. Sho Hokke daimoku sho, STN 1:202. 

166 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
119. “Gassui gosho,” STN, 1:291. 
120. “Nichinyo gozen gohenji,” STN, 2:1375. For a detailed description 
of the great mandala (daimandara), see Nichirenshu Jiten Kanko Iinkai, ed., 
Nichirenshu jiten (Tokyo: Nichirenshu Shumuin, 1981), pp. 262-264. 
121. Takagi Yutaka, Nichiren to sono montei, p. 74; Watanabe Hoyo, “Dai- 
mandara to Hokkedo,” Nichiren to sono kyodan 1 (1976): 90-95. 
122. Miyazaki Eishu, Nichirenshu no kitoho (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 
1980), p. 48. 

Copy paste of the Wikipedia article on Taylor Swift, as of Feb 16, 2024.
---

Main menu

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia

Search
Create account
Log in

Personal tools
Contents  hide
(Top)
Life and career
Toggle Life and career subsection
Artistry
Toggle Artistry subsection
Accolades and achievements
Cultural status
Toggle Cultural status subsection
Wealth
Toggle Wealth subsection
Discography
Filmography
Tours
See also
Footnotes
References
Toggle References subsection
External links
Taylor Swift

136 languages
Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
 Featured article
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For the album, see Taylor Swift (album).
Taylor Swift
Portrait of Taylor Swift in a cocktail dress
Swift at the 2023 MTV Video Music Awards
Born	Taylor Alison Swift
December 13, 1989 (age 34)
West Reading, Pennsylvania, US
Occupations
Singer-songwriter producer director businesswoman actress
Years active	2004–present
Works
Albumssinglessongsvideosperformances
Relatives
Austin Swift (brother)
Marjorie Finlay (grandmother)
Awards	Full list
Musical career
Origin	Nashville, Tennessee, US
Genres
Pop country folk rock alternative
Instruments
Vocals guitar banjo piano ukulele
Labels
RCA Republic Big Machine
Website	www.taylorswift.com Edit this at Wikidata
Signature

Taylor Alison Swift (born December 13, 1989) is an American singer-songwriter. Her versatile artistry, songwriting, and entrepreneurship have influenced the music industry, popular culture, and politics, and her life is a subject of widespread media coverage.
Swift began professional songwriting at 14 and signed with Big Machine Records in 2005 to become a country singer. She released six studio albums under the label, four of them to country radio, starting with Taylor Swift (2006). Her next, Fearless (2008), explored country pop, and its singles "Love Story" and "You Belong with Me" catapulted her to mainstream fame. Speak Now (2010) infused rock influences, while Red (2012) experimented with electronic elements and featured Swift's first Billboard Hot 100 number-one song, "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together". She departed from her country image with 1989 (2014), a synth-pop album supported by the chart-topping songs "Shake It Off", "Blank Space", and "Bad Blood". Media scrutiny inspired the hip-hop-influenced Reputation (2017) and its number-one single "Look What You Made Me Do".
After signing with Republic Records in 2018, Swift released the eclectic pop album Lover (2019) and the autobiographical documentary Miss Americana (2020). She explored indie folk styles on the 2020 albums Folklore and Evermore, subdued electropop on Midnights (2022), and re-recorded four albums subtitled Taylor's Version after a dispute with Big Machine. These albums spawned the number-one songs "Cruel Summer", "Cardigan", "Willow", "Anti-Hero", "All Too Well", and "Is It Over Now?". Her Eras Tour (2023–2024) and its accompanying concert film became the highest-grossing tour and concert film of all time, respectively. Swift has directed several music videos and films such as Folklore: The Long Pond Studio Sessions (2020) and All Too Well: The Short Film (2021).
One of the world's best-selling musicians, with over 200 million records sold as of 2019, Swift has been named Global Recording Artist of the Year three times by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry, whereas six of her albums have opened with over a million sales in a week. She is the highest-grossing female touring act, the most-streamed woman on Spotify and Apple Music, and the first billionaire with music as the main source of income. The 2023 Time Person of the Year, Swift has appeared on lists such as Rolling Stone's 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time, Billboard's Greatest of All Time Artists, and Forbes' World's 100 Most Powerful Women. Her accolades include 14 Grammy Awards (featuring a record four Album of the Year wins), a Primetime Emmy Award, 40 American Music Awards, 40 Billboard Music Awards, and 23 MTV Video Music Awards.
Life and career
Early life

Swift's childhood home in Wyomissing, Pennsylvania
Taylor Alison Swift was born on December 13, 1989,[1] in West Reading, Pennsylvania.[2] She is named after singer-songwriter James Taylor.[3] Her father, Scott Kingsley Swift, is a former stockbroker for Merrill Lynch[4] and her mother, Andrea Gardner Swift (née Finlay), worked for a time as a mutual fund marketing executive.[5] Taylor has a younger brother, actor Austin Swift.[6]
Swift's mother is of Scottish and German descent, and her father is of Scottish and English descent with distant Italian ancestry.[7][8] Swift's paternal great-great-grandfather, Charles Carmine Antonio Baldi, was an Italian immigrant entrepreneur and community leader who opened several businesses in Philadelphia in the 1800s.[9][10][8] Her maternal grandmother, Marjorie (née Moehlenkamp) Finlay, was an opera singer.[11]
Swift spent her early years on a Christmas tree farm that her father had purchased from one of his clients.[12][13] She is a Christian.[14] She attended preschool and kindergarten at Alvernia Montessori School, run by Bernardine Franciscan sisters,[15] before transferring to the Wyndcroft School.[16] The family moved to a rented house in Wyomissing, Pennsylvania,[17] where Swift attended Wyomissing Area Junior/Senior High School.[18]
At age nine, Swift became interested in musical theater and performed in four Berks Youth Theatre Academy productions.[19] She also traveled regularly to New York City for vocal and acting lessons.[20] Swift later shifted her focus toward country music, inspired by Shania Twain's songs, which made her "want to just run around the block four times and daydream about everything".[21] She spent weekends performing at local festivals and events.[22][23] After watching a documentary about Faith Hill, Swift felt she needed to move to Nashville, Tennessee, to pursue a career in music.[24] She traveled there with her mother at age eleven to visit record labels and submitted demo tapes of Dolly Parton and Dixie Chicks karaoke covers.[25] She was rejected, however, because "everyone in that town wanted to do what I wanted to do. So, I kept thinking to myself, I need to figure out a way to be different."[26] She spent summers in Stone Harbor, New Jersey until she was 14 years old, performing in a local coffee shop.[27][28]
When Swift was around 12 years old, musician Ronnie Cremer taught her to play guitar. Cremer helped with her first efforts as a songwriter, leading her to write "Lucky You".[29] In 2003, Swift and her parents started working with New York–based talent manager Dan Dymtrow. With his help, Swift modeled for Abercrombie & Fitch as part of their "Rising Stars" campaign, had an original song included on a Maybelline compilation CD, and met with major record labels.[30] After performing original songs at an RCA Records showcase, Swift, then 13 years old, was given an artist development deal and began making frequent trips to Nashville with her mother.[31][32][33] To help Swift break into the country music scene, her father transferred to Merrill Lynch's Nashville office when she was 14 years old, and the family relocated to Hendersonville, Tennessee.[12][34] Swift attended Hendersonville High School[35] before transferring to Aaron Academy after two years, which better accommodated her touring schedule through homeschooling. She graduated one year early.[36][37]
2004–2008: Career beginnings and first album
In Nashville, Swift worked with experienced Music Row songwriters such as Troy Verges, Brett Beavers, Brett James, Mac McAnally, and the Warren Brothers[38][39] and formed a lasting working relationship with Liz Rose.[40] They began meeting for two-hour writing sessions every Tuesday afternoon after school.[41] Rose called the sessions "some of the easiest I've ever done. Basically, I was just her editor. She'd write about what happened in school that day. She had such a clear vision of what she was trying to say. And she'd come in with the most incredible hooks." Swift became the youngest artist signed by the Sony/ATV Tree publishing house,[42] but left then BMG-owned RCA Records (later bought by Sony Music) at the age of 14 due to the label's lack of care and them "cut[ting] other people's stuff". She was also concerned that development deals can shelve artists[33][23] and recalled: "I genuinely felt that I was running out of time. I wanted to capture these years of my life on an album while they still represented what I was going through."[43]
Taylor Swift singing on a microphone and playing a guitar
Swift opening for Brad Paisley in 2007. To promote her first album, she opened tours for other country musicians in 2007 and 2008.[44]
At an industry showcase at Nashville's Bluebird Cafe in 2005, Swift caught the attention of Scott Borchetta, a DreamWorks Records executive who was preparing to form an independent record label, Big Machine Records. She had first met Borchetta in 2004.[45] She was one of Big Machine's first signings,[33] and her father purchased a three-percent stake in the company for an estimated $120,000.[46][47] She began working on her eponymous debut album with Nathan Chapman.[23] Swift wrote or co-wrote all album tracks, and co-writers included Rose, Robert Ellis Orrall, Brian Maher, and Angelo Petraglia.[48] Taylor Swift was released on October 24, 2006.[49] Country Weekly critic Chris Neal deemed Swift better than previous aspiring teenage country singers because of her "honesty, intelligence and idealism".[50] The album peaked at number five on the US Billboard 200, on which it spent 157 weeks—the longest stay on the chart by any release in the US in the 2000s decade.[51] Swift became the first female country music artist to write or co-write every track on a US platinum-certified debut album.[52]
Big Machine Records was still in its infancy during the June 2006 release of the lead single, "Tim McGraw", which Swift and her mother helped promote by packaging and sending copies of the CD single to country radio stations. As there was not enough furniture at the label yet, they would sit on the floor to do so.[53] She spent much of 2006 promoting Taylor Swift with a radio tour and television appearances; she opened for Rascal Flatts on select dates during their 2006 tour,[54] as a replacement for Eric Church.[55] Borchetta said that although record industry peers initially disapproved of his signing a 15-year-old singer-songwriter, Swift tapped into a previously unknown market—teenage girls who listen to country music.[53][12]
Following "Tim McGraw", four more singles were released throughout 2007 and 2008: "Teardrops on My Guitar", "Our Song", "Picture to Burn" and "Should've Said No". All appeared on Billboard's Hot Country Songs, with "Our Song" and "Should've Said No" reaching number one. With "Our Song", Swift became the youngest person to single-handedly write and sing a number-one song on the chart.[56] "Teardrops on My Guitar" reached number thirteen on the US Billboard Hot 100.[57] Swift also released two EPs, The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection in October 2007 and Beautiful Eyes in July 2008.[58][59] She promoted her debut album extensively as the opening act for other country musicians' tours in 2006 and 2007, including those by George Strait,[60] Brad Paisley,[61] and Tim McGraw and Faith Hill.[62]
Swift won multiple accolades for Taylor Swift. She was one of the recipients of the Nashville Songwriters Association's Songwriter/Artist of the Year in 2007, becoming the youngest person given the title.[63] She also won the Country Music Association's Horizon Award for Best New Artist,[64] the Academy of Country Music Awards' Top New Female Vocalist,[65] and the American Music Awards' Favorite Country Female Artist honor.[66] She was also nominated for Best New Artist at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards.[67] In 2008, she opened for Rascal Flatts again[68] and briefly dated the singer Joe Jonas.[69][70]
2008–2010: Fearless
Taylor Swift in 2009
Swift at the 2009 premiere of Hannah Montana: The Movie. She had a cameo appearance in the film and wrote two songs for its soundtrack.[71][72]
Swift's second studio album, Fearless, was released on November 11, 2008, in North America,[73] and in March 2009 in other markets.[74] Critics lauded Swift's honest and vulnerable songwriting in contrast to other teenage singers.[75] Five singles were released in 2008–2009: "Love Story", "White Horse", "You Belong with Me", "Fifteen", and "Fearless". The first single peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one in Australia.[57][76] It was the first country song to top Billboard's Pop Songs chart.[77] "You Belong with Me" was the album's highest-charting single on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number two,[78] and was the first country song to top Billboard's all-genre Radio Songs chart.[79] All five singles were Hot Country Songs top-10 entries, with "Love Story" and "You Belong with Me" topping the chart.[80] Fearless became her first number-one album on the Billboard 200 and 2009's top-selling album in the US.[81] The Fearless Tour, Swift's first headlining concert tour, grossed over $63 million.[82] Journey to Fearless, a documentary miniseries, aired on television and was later released on DVD and Blu-ray.[83] Swift performed as a supporting act for Keith Urban's Escape Together World Tour in 2009.[84]
In 2009, the music video for "You Belong with Me" was named Best Female Video at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards.[85] Her acceptance speech was interrupted by rapper Kanye West,[86] an incident that became the subject of controversy, widespread media attention and Internet memes.[87] That year she won five American Music Awards, including Artist of the Year and Favorite Country Album.[88] Billboard named her 2009's Artist of the Year.[89] She won Video of the Year and Female Video of the Year for "Love Story" at the 2009 CMT Music Awards, where she made a parody video of the song with rapper T-Pain called "Thug Story".[90] At the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards, Fearless was named Album of the Year and Best Country Album, and "White Horse" won Best Country Song and Best Female Country Vocal Performance. Swift was the youngest artist to win Album of the Year.[note 1] At the 2009 Country Music Association Awards, Swift won Album of the Year for Fearless and was named Entertainer of the Year, the youngest person to win the honor.[93]
Swift featured on John Mayer's single "Half of My Heart" and Boys Like Girls' single "Two Is Better Than One", the latter of which she co-wrote.[94][95] She co-wrote and recorded "Best Days of Your Life" with Kellie Pickler,[96] and wrote two songs for the Hannah Montana: The Movie soundtrack—"You'll Always Find Your Way Back Home" and "Crazier".[72] She contributed two songs to the Valentine's Day soundtrack, including the single "Today Was a Fairytale", which was her first number-one on the Canadian Hot 100 and peaked at number two on the US Hot 100.[97][98] While shooting her film debut Valentine's Day in October 2009, Swift dated co-star Taylor Lautner.[99] In 2009, she made her television debut as a rebellious teenager in an CSI: Crime Scene Investigation episode,[100] and she hosted and performed as the musical guest on Saturday Night Live; she was the first host ever to write their own opening monologue.[101][102]
2010–2014: Speak Now and Red
Swift singing into a mic while playing a banjo
Swift performing at the Speak Now World Tour in 2012
In August 2010, Swift released "Mine", the lead single from her third studio album, Speak Now. The single entered the Hot 100 at number three.[103] Swift wrote the album alone and co-produced every track.[104] The album was released on October 25, 2010,[105] opening atop the Billboard 200 with over one million copies sold.[106] It became the fastest-selling digital album by a female artist, with 278,000 downloads in a week.[107] Critics appreciated Swift's grown-up perspectives:[108] Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone wrote, "in a mere four years, the 20-year-old Nashville firecracker has put her name on three dozen or so of the smartest songs released by anyone in pop, rock or country."[109] "Back to December", "Mean", "The Story of Us", "Sparks Fly", and "Ours" became subsequent singles, with the latter two reaching number one on the Hot Country Songs[80] and the first two peaking in the top ten in Canada.[98] She dated actor Jake Gyllenhaal in 2010.[110]
At the 54th Annual Grammy Awards in 2012, Swift won Best Country Song and Best Country Solo Performance for "Mean", which she performed during the ceremony.[111] Swift won other awards for Speak Now, including Songwriter/Artist of the Year by the Nashville Songwriters Association (2010 and 2011),[112][113] Woman of the Year by Billboard (2011),[114] and Entertainer of the Year by the Academy of Country Music (2011 and 2012)[115] and the Country Music Association in 2011.[116] At the American Music Awards of 2011, Swift won Artist of the Year and Favorite Country Album.[117] Rolling Stone named Speak Now amongst its "50 Best Female Albums of All Time" (2012), writing: "She might get played on the country station, but she's one of the few genuine rock stars we've got these days, with a flawless ear for what makes a song click."[118]
The Speak Now World Tour ran from February 2011 to March 2012 and grossed over $123 million,[119] followed up by the live album, Speak Now World Tour: Live.[120] She contributed two original songs to The Hunger Games soundtrack album: "Eyes Open" and "Safe & Sound", co-written and recorded with the Civil Wars and T-Bone Burnett. "Safe & Sound" won the Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media and was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song.[121][122] Swift featured on B.o.B's single "Both of Us", released in May 2012.[123] She dated Conor Kennedy that year.[124]
Taylor Swift on the Red Tour
Swift on the Red Tour (2013)
In August 2012, Swift released "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together", the lead single from her fourth studio album, Red. It became her first number one single in the US and New Zealand,[125][126] and became the fastest-selling single in digital history.[127] Other singles from the album were "Begin Again", "I Knew You Were Trouble", "22", "Everything Has Changed", "The Last Time", and "Red". "I Knew You Were Trouble" reached the top five on charts in Australia, Canada, Denmark, Ireland, New Zealand, the UK and the US.[128] "Begin Again", "22", and "Red" reached the top 20 in the US.[57] On Red, released on October 22, 2012,[129] Swift worked with Chapman and Rose, as well as the new producers Max Martin and Shellback.[130] It incorporated many pop and rock styles such as heartland rock, dubstep and dance-pop.[131] Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times said Swift "strives for something much more grand and accomplished" with Red.[132] It opened at number one on the Billboard 200 with 1.21 million sales.[133] Red was Swift's first number-one album in the UK.[134] It earned several accolades, including four nominations at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards (2014).[135] Swift received American Music Awards for Best Female Country Artist in 2012, Artist of the Year in 2013,[136][137] and the Nashville Songwriters Association's Songwriter/Artist Award for the fifth and sixth consecutive years.[138] The Red Tour ran from March 2013 to June 2014 and grossed over $150 million, becoming the highest-grossing country tour ever.[139] Swift was honored with the Pinnacle Award, making her the second recipient of the accolade after Garth Brooks.[140] During this time, she briefly dated the English singer Harry Styles.[141]
In 2013, Swift recorded "Sweeter than Fiction", a song she wrote and produced with Jack Antonoff for the One Chance soundtrack. The song received a Best Original Song nomination at the 71st Golden Globe Awards.[142] She provided guest vocals for Tim McGraw's song "Highway Don't Care", also featuring Keith Urban.[143] Swift performed "As Tears Go By" with the Rolling Stones in Chicago, Illinois, as part of the band's 50 & Counting tour,[144] and joined Florida Georgia Line at their set at the 2013 Country Radio Seminar to sing "Cruise".[145] Swift voiced Audrey in the animated film The Lorax (2012),[146] made a cameo in the sitcom New Girl (2013),[147] and had a supporting role in the dystopian film The Giver (2014).[148]
2014–2018: 1989 and Reputation
Swift performing on a mic, dressed in a blue skirt
Swift at the 1989 World Tour, the highest-grossing tour of 2015
In March 2014, Swift began living in New York City.[note 2] She hired Tree Paine as her publicist[151] and worked on her fifth studio album, 1989, with the producers Jack Antonoff, Max Martin, Shellback, Imogen Heap, Ryan Tedder, and Ali Payami.[152] She promoted the album extensively, including inviting fans to secret album-listening sessions.[153] 1989 was released on October 27, 2014, and opened atop the Billboard 200 with 1.28 million copies sold.[154] Its singles "Shake It Off", "Blank Space" and "Bad Blood" reached number one in Australia, Canada and the US, the first two making Swift the first woman to replace herself at the Hot 100 top spot;[155] other singles include "Style", "Wildest Dreams", "Out of the Woods" and "New Romantics".[156] The 1989 World Tour (2015) was the highest-grossing tour of the year with $250 million in total revenue.[157]
Prior to 1989's release, Swift stressed the importance of albums to artists and fans.[158] In November 2014, she removed her entire catalog from Spotify, arguing that its ad-supported, free service undermined the premium service, which provides higher royalties for songwriters.[159] In a June 2015 open letter, Swift criticized Apple Music for not offering royalties to artists during the streaming service's free three-month trial period and stated that she would pull 1989 from the catalog.[160] The following day, Apple Inc. announced that it would pay artists during the free trial period,[161] and Swift agreed to let 1989 on the streaming service.[162] She then returned her entire catalog plus 1989 to Spotify, Amazon Music and Google Play and other digital streaming platforms in June 2017.[163] Swift was named Billboard's Woman of the Year in 2014, becoming the first artist to win the award twice.[164] At the 2014 American Music Awards, Swift received the inaugural Dick Clark Award for Excellence.[165] On her 25th birthday in 2014, the Grammy Museum at L.A. Live opened an exhibit in her honor in Los Angeles that ran until October 4, 2015, and broke museum attendance records.[166][167] In 2015, Swift won the Brit Award for International Female Solo Artist.[168] The video for "Bad Blood" won Video of the Year and Best Collaboration at the 2015 MTV Video Music Awards.[169] At the 58th Grammy Awards (2016), 1989 won Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album, making Swift the first woman and fifth act overall to win Album of the Year twice.[170]
Swift wearing a sparkling blazer singing on a mic
Swift on her Reputation Stadium Tour (2018), the highest-grossing North American tour ever
Swift dated the Scottish DJ Calvin Harris from March 2015 to June 2016.[171] They co-wrote the song "This Is What You Came For", featuring vocals from the Barbadian singer Rihanna; Swift was initially credited under the pseudonym Nils Sjöberg.[172] In April 2016, Swift criticized the lyrics of Kanye West's single "Famous", in which he sings "I made that bitch famous" in reference to his interruption of her acceptance speech at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards. West claimed he had received her approval for the line, and his then-wife Kim Kardashian released video clips of Swift and West discussing the single amicably over the phone; a full recording leaked in 2020 established that West did not disclose that he would call her a "bitch".[173][174]
After briefly dating the English actor Tom Hiddleston,[175] Swift entered a six-year relationship with the English actor Joe Alwyn in September 2016.[176][177][178] She wrote the song "Better Man" for the band Little Big Town, which earned her the Song of the Year award at the 51st CMA Awards.[179] Swift and English singer Zayn Malik released the joint single "I Don't Wanna Live Forever" for Fifty Shades Darker: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack (2017). The song reached number two in the US.[180]
In August 2017, Swift successfully countersued David Mueller, a former radio jockey for KYGO-FM, who sued her for damages from loss of employment. Four years earlier, she informed Mueller's bosses that he had sexually assaulted her by groping her at an event.[181] Also that month, after a one-year hiatus from the spotlight, Swift cleared her social media accounts and released "Look What You Made Me Do" as the lead single from her sixth album, Reputation.[182][183] The single was Swift's first UK number-one single.[184] It topped charts in Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, and the US.[185] Reputation, released on November 10, 2017,[186] incorporated electropop, hip hop, R&B, and EDM.[187] Reviews praised Swift's mature artistry, but some denounced the themes of fame and gossip.[188] The album opened atop the Billboard 200 with 1.21 million US sales[189] and topped the charts in the UK, Australia, and Canada.[190] Its singles "...Ready for It?", "End Game" (featuring Ed Sheeran and Future), and "Delicate" were released to pop radio.[191] Reputation was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album.[192] Swift featured on the country duo Sugarland's "Babe" (2018).[193]
At the 2018 American Music Awards, Swift won four awards, which made her accumulate 23 trophies in total and become the AMAs' most awarded female musician, surpassing Whitney Houston.[194] The same year, she embarked on her Reputation Stadium Tour,[195] which became the highest-grossing North American concert tour in history and grossed $345.7 million worldwide.[196]
2018–2020: Lover, Folklore, and Evermore
In November 2018, she signed a new deal with the Universal Music Group; her subsequent releases were promoted by Republic Records. Swift said the contract included a provision for her to maintain ownership of her masters. In addition, in the event that Universal sold any part of its stake in Spotify, it agreed to distribute a non-recoupable portion of the proceeds among its artists.[197] Vox called it a huge commitment from Universal, which was "far from assured" until Swift intervened.[198]
A portrait of Swift
Swift at the American Music Awards of 2019, where she was named Artist of the Decade
Swift's first album with Republic Records, Lover, was released on August 23, 2019.[199] Besides Antonoff, she worked with Louis Bell, Frank Dukes, and Joel Little.[200] Lover was her sixth consecutive album to sell more than 500,000 US copies in one week.[201] Critics commended the album's free-spirited mood and emotional intimacy.[202][203] The singles "Me!" and "You Need to Calm Down" both peaked at number two on the Hot 100,[204] and other singles were the top-10 single "Lover", the top-40 single "The Man",[57] and the 2023 resurgent success, chart topper "Cruel Summer".[205] Lover was the world's best-selling album by a solo artist of 2019,[206] and along with its singles earned nominations at the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards in 2020.[207] At the 2019 MTV Video Music Awards, "Me!" won Best Visual Effects, and "You Need to Calm Down" won Video of the Year and Video for Good. Swift was the first female and second artist overall to win Video of the Year for a video that they directed.[208]
While promoting Lover, Swift became embroiled in a public dispute with the talent manager Scooter Braun and Big Machine over the purchase of the masters of her back catalog.[209][210] Swift said she had been trying to buy the masters, but Big Machine would only allow her to do so if she exchanged one new album for each older one under a new contract, which she refused to sign.[209][211] Swift began re-recording her back catalog in November 2020.[212] Besides music, she played Bombalurina in the film adaptation of Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical Cats (2019), for which she co-wrote and recorded the Golden Globe-nominated original song "Beautiful Ghosts".[213][214] Critics panned the film but praised Swift's performance.[215] The documentary Miss Americana, which chronicled parts of Swift's life and career, premiered at the 2020 Sundance Film Festival.[216] Swift signed a global publishing deal with Universal Music Publishing Group in February 2020 after her 16-year contract with Sony/ATV expired.[217]
Amidst the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, Swift surprise-released two "sister albums" that she recorded with Antonoff and Aaron Dessner: Folklore on July 24, and Evermore on December 11.[218][219] Alwyn co-wrote and co-produced a few songs under the pseudonym William Bowery.[220] Both explore indie folk with a more muted production compared to her previous upbeat pop songs[221][222] and earned Swift widespread critical acclaim and artistic recognition.[223][224] Each album was supported by three singles catering to US pop, country, and triple A radio formats. The singles were "Cardigan", "Betty", and "Exile" from Folklore, and "Willow", "No Body, No Crime", and "Coney Island" from Evermore.[225] Folklore made Swift the first woman to win the Grammy Award for Album of the Year three times at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards[226] and was the best-selling album of 2020 in the US.[227] Swift became the first artist to debut a US number-one album and a number-one song at the same time with Folklore's "Cardigan".[228] At the 2020 American Music Awards, she won three awards, including Artist of the Year for a record third consecutive time.[229] According to Billboard, she was 2020's highest-paid musician in the US and highest-paid solo musician worldwide.[230]
2020–2023: Re-recordings and Midnights

Swift performing in 2022
Following the masters dispute, Swift released re-recordings of her first six studio albums, beginning with Fearless (Taylor's Version) and Red (Taylor's Version) in April and November 2021, respectively. Both peaked atop the Billboard 200,[231] and the former was the first re-recorded album to do so.[232] Fearless (Taylor's Version) was preceded by "Love Story (Taylor's Version)", which made her the second artist after Dolly Parton to have both the original and re-recorded versions of a song reach number one on the Hot Country Songs chart.[233] Red (Taylor's Version) was supported by "All Too Well (10 Minute Version)", which became the longest song in history to top the Hot 100.[234] The song was accompanied by a short film, which won a Grammy Award for Best Music Video[235] and Swift's record third MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year.[236]
Swift's tenth studio album, Midnights, was released on October 21, 2022.[237] Characterized by a restrained electropop[238][239] and synth-pop[240] sound, the album was dubbed by Rolling Stone critics as an instant classic.[241][242] The album was her fifth to open atop the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of over one million copies and broke various sales and streaming records,[243] including the most single-day streams and most single-week streams on Spotify.[244] Its tracks, led by single "Anti-Hero", monopolized the top 10 of the Hot 100, making Swift the first artist to do so.[245] Two other singles, "Lavender Haze" and "Karma", peaked at number two on the Hot 100.[246] Swift won nine awards at the 2023 MTV Video Music Awards, including Video of the Year ("Anti-Hero") for a record fourth time.[247] At the 66th Annual Grammy Awards, she received Best Pop Vocal Album, and her fourth Album of the Year—the most for any artist.[248]
Swift released the third re-recorded album, Speak Now (Taylor's Version), on July 7, 2023, becoming the woman with the most number-one albums (12) in Billboard 200 history, surpassing Barbra Streisand.[249] 1989 (Taylor's Version), released on October 27, 2023, became Swift's record-extending sixth album to sell one million copies in a single week in the US and surpassed Midnights for her career's largest album sales week.[250] Its single "Is It Over Now?" debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100. Swift was 2023's most streamed artist on Spotify,[251] Apple Music,[252] and Amazon Music;[253] the first act to place number one on the year-end Billboard top artists list in three different decades (2009, 2015 and 2023);[254] and the first living artist to simultaneously chart five albums in the top 10 of the Billboard 200.[255] She had five out of the 10 best-selling albums of 2023 in the United States, a record since Luminate began tracking US music sales in 1991.[256][257]
Beyond her albums, Swift featured on five songs from 2021 to 2023: "Renegade" and "Birch" by Big Red Machine,[258] a remix of "Gasoline" by Haim,[259] "The Joker and the Queen" by Ed Sheeran,[260] and "The Alcott" by the National.[261] For the soundtrack of the 2022 film Where the Crawdads Sing, she recorded "Carolina", which received nominations for Best Original Song at the Golden Globes and Best Song Written for Visual Media at the Grammy Awards.[262] Outside of music, Swift had a supporting role in the 2022 period comedy film Amsterdam and has signed to direct an upcoming feature film for Searchlight Pictures.[263][264]
2023–present: The Eras Tour and The Tortured Poets Department
Swift singing into a mic
Swift on the Eras Tour in 2023
In March 2023, Swift embarked on the Eras Tour, a retrospective tour covering all her studio albums. Media outlets extensively covered the tour's cultural and economic impact,[265] and its US leg broke the record for the most tickets sold in a day.[245] Ticketmaster received public and political criticisms for mishandling the tour's ticket sales.[266] The Eras Tour became the highest-grossing tour in history, collecting over $1 billion.[267][268] Its concert film, released to theaters worldwide on October 13, 2023, grossed over $250 million to become the highest-grossing concert film, and was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Cinematic and Box Office Achievement.[269][270] Swift's music releases, touring, and related activities culminated in an unprecedented height of popularity post-pandemic.[271] Music Business Worldwide remarked that she entered a "new stratosphere of global career success" in 2023.[272]
Swift began dating Kansas City Chiefs' tight end Travis Kelce in 2023.[273] In January 2024, AI-generated fake pornographic images portraying Swift were posted to X (formerly Twitter) and spread to other social media platforms, spurring criticism and demands for legal reform.[274][275] At the 66th Grammy Awards, Swift announced her eleventh studio album, The Tortured Poets Department, set for release on April 19, 2024.[248][276]
Artistry
Influences
One of Swift's earliest memories of music is listening to her maternal grandmother, Marjorie Finlay, sing in church.[5] As a child, she enjoyed Disney film soundtracks: "My parents noticed that, once I had run out of words, I would just make up my own."[277] Swift said she owes her confidence and "fascination with writing and storytelling" to her mother, who helped her prepare for class presentations as a child.[278][279]
Swift was drawn to the storytelling aspect of country music,[280] which was introduced to the genre by female country artists of the 1990s: Shania Twain, Faith Hill, and the Dixie Chicks.[281][282] Twain, both as a songwriter and performer, was her biggest musical influence.[283] Hill was Swift's childhood role model, and she would often imitate her.[284] She admired the Chicks' defiant attitude and the way they played their instruments,[285] and was also influenced by older country stars like Patsy Cline, Loretta Lynn, Tammy Wynette, and Dolly Parton,[22] the last of whom she believes is exemplary to female songwriters.[114] As a songwriter, Swift was influenced by Joni Mitchell's emotional and autobiographical lyrics, highlighting Mitchell's 1971 album Blue as a favorite "because it explores somebody's soul so deeply".[286] She also spoke of influence from 1990s songwriters such as Melissa Etheridge, Sarah McLachlan, and Alanis Morissette,[287][288] and alt-country artists like Patty Griffin[289] and Lori McKenna.[290]
Various pop and rock artists have also influenced Swift. She lists Paul McCartney, Bruce Springsteen, Emmylou Harris, and Kris Kristofferson as her career role models.[12][291] 1989 was influenced by some of her favorite 1980s pop acts, including Peter Gabriel, Annie Lennox, Phil Collins, and Madonna.[292][293] She also cited Keith Urban's musical style and Fall Out Boy's lyrics as major influences.[294][295]
Genres
"If there's one thing that Swift has proven throughout her career, it's that she refuses to be put in a box. Her ever-evolving sound took her from country darling to pop phenom to folk's newest raconteur."
—The Recording Academy, 2021[296]
Swift is known for venturing into various music genres and undergoing artistic reinventions,[297][264] having been described as a "music chameleon".[298][299] She self-identified as a country musician until 2012, when she released her fourth studio album, Red.[300] Her albums were promoted to country radio, but music critics noted wide-ranging styles of pop and rock[301][302] and said that the melodies of her songs were rooted in pop, and the country music elements were limited to instruments such as banjo, mandolin, and fiddle, and her slight twang.[303][304] Some commented that her country music identity was an indicator of her narrative songwriting rather than musical style.[305][306] Although the Nashville music industry was receptive of Swift's status as a country musician, critics accused her of abandoning her roots in favor of crossover success in mainstream pop.[307][308] Red's eclectic pop, rock, and electronic styles intensified the critical debate, to which Swift responded, "I leave the genre labeling to other people."[309]
Music journalist Jody Rosen commented that by originating her musical career in Nashville, Swift made a "bait-and-switch maneuver, planting roots in loamy country soil, then pivoting to pop".[310] She abandoned her country music identity in 2014 with the release of her synth-pop fifth studio album, 1989. Swift described it as her first "documented, official pop album".[311] Her subsequent albums Reputation (2017) and Lover (2019) have an upbeat pop production; the former incorporates hip hop, trap, and EDM elements.[312][313][314] Midnights (2022), on the other hand, is distinguished by a more experimental, "subdued and amorphous pop sound".[315][316] Although reviews of Swift's pop albums were generally positive, some critics lamented that the pop music production indicated Swift's pursuit of mainstream success, eroding her authenticity as a songwriter nurtured by her country music background—a criticism that has been retrospectively described as rockist.[317][318] Musicologist Nate Sloan remarked that Swift's pop music transition was rather motivated by her need to expand her artistry.[319] Swift eschewed mainstream pop in favor of alternative, folk and indie rock styles with her 2020 studio albums Folklore and Evermore.[320][321] Clash said her career "has always been one of transcendence and covert boundary-pushing", reaching a point at which "Taylor Swift is just Taylor Swift", not defined by any genre.[322]
Voice

"Cardigan"
Duration: 22 seconds.0:22
Swift uses her lower register in "Cardigan" (2020).[323]
"Lavender Haze"
Duration: 18 seconds.0:18
"Lavender Haze" (2022) features Swift's falsetto vocals in the refrain.[324]
Problems playing these files? See media help.
Swift possesses a mezzo-soprano vocal range,[325] and a generally soft but versatile timbre.[326][327] As a country singer, her vocals were criticized by some as weak and strained compared to those of her contemporaries.[328] Swift admitted her vocal ability often concerned her in her early career and has worked hard to improve.[329] Reviews of her vocals remained mixed after she transitioned to pop music with 1989; critics complained that she lacked proper technique but appreciated her usage of her voice to communicate her feelings to the audience, prioritizing "intimacy over power and nuance".[330] They also praised her for refraining from correcting her pitch with Auto-Tune.[331]
The Los Angeles Times remarked that Swift's defining vocal feature is her attention to detail to convey an exact feeling—"the line that slides down like a contented sigh or up like a raised eyebrow".[332] With Reputation, critics noted she was "learning how to use her voice as a percussion instrument of its own",[333] swapping her "signature" expressive vocals for "cool, conversational, detached" cadences and rhythms similar to hip hop and R&B styles.[334][335][336] Alternative Press stated that her "evocative" vocal stylings are more reminiscent of pop-punk and emo genres.[337]
Reviews of Swift's later albums and performances were more appreciative of her vocals, finding them less nasal, richer, more resonant, and more powerful.[304][338][339] With Folklore and Evermore, Swift received praise for her sharp and agile yet translucent and controlled voice.[340][341][342] Pitchfork described it as "versatile and expressive".[343] With her 2021 re-recorded albums, critics began to praise the mature, deeper and "fuller" tone of her voice.[344][345][346] An i review said Swift's voice is "leagues better now".[347] The Guardian highlighted "yo-yoing vocal yelps" and passionate climaxes as the trademarks of Swift's voice,[348] and that her country twang faded away.[349] Midnights received acclaim for Swift's nuanced vocal delivery.[350] She ranked 102nd on the 2023 Rolling Stone list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.[327] In a review of the Eras Tour, The New Yorker critic Amanda Petrusich praised the clarity and tone of Swift's live vocals.[351] Musicologist Alyssa Barna said that Swift's timbre is "breathy and bright" in her upper register and "full and dark" in the lower.[222]
Songwriting
Further information: List of songs by Taylor Swift
Swift has been referred to as one of the greatest songwriters ever by several publications.[352][353][354] Literature scholars like Jonathan Bate and Stephanie Burt have noted that her literary and melodic sensibility and writing style are rare amongst her peers.[355][356] Swift's bridges are often noted as one of the best aspects of her songs,[357][358] earning her the title "Queen of Bridges" from Time.[359] Mojo described her as "a sharp narrator with a gift for the extended metaphor".[360]
In The New Yorker in 2011, Swift said she identifies as a songwriter first: "I write songs, and my voice is just a way to get those lyrics across".[12] Her personal experiences were a common inspiration for her early songs, which helped her navigate life.[361][362] Her "diaristic" technique began with identifying an emotion, followed by a corresponding melody.[363][364] On her first three studio albums, love, heartbreak, and insecurities, from an adolescent perspective, were dominant themes.[365][366] She delved into the tumult of toxic relationships on Red,[367] and embraced nostalgia and post-romance positivity on 1989.[292] Reputation was inspired by the downsides of Swift's fame,[368] and Lover detailed her realization of the "full spectrum of love".[369] Other themes in Swift's music include family dynamics, friendship,[370][371] alienation, self-awareness, and tackling vitriol, especially sexism.[279][372]
Her confessional lyrics received positive reviews from critics,[373][12][374] who highlighted their vivid details and emotional engagement, which they found uncommon in pop music.[375][376][377] Critics also praised her melodic compositions; Rolling Stone described Swift as "a songwriting savant with an intuitive gift for verse-chorus-bridge architecture".[378][379] NPR dubbed Swift "a master of the vernacular in her lyrics",[335] remarking that her songs offer emotional engagement because "the wit and clarity of her arrangements turn them from standard fare to heartfelt disclosures".[379] Despite the positive reception, The New Yorker stated she was generally portrayed "more as a skilled technician than as a Dylanesque visionary".[12] Tabloid media often speculated and linked the subjects of her songs with her ex-lovers, a practice reviewers and Swift herself criticized as sexist.[380][381][382] Aside from clues in album liner notes, Swift avoided talking about the subjects of her songs.[383]
On her 2020 albums Folklore and Evermore, Swift was inspired by escapism and romanticism to explore fictional narratives.[384] She imposed emotions onto imagined characters and story arcs, which liberated her from tabloid attention and suggested new paths for her artistry.[363] Swift explained that she welcomed the new songwriting direction after she stopped worrying about commercial success.[384] According to Spin, she explored complex emotions with "precision and devastation" on Evermore.[385] Consequence stated her 2020 albums convinced skeptics of her songwriting prowess, noting her transformation from "teenage wunderkind to a confident and careful adult".[358]
Swift divides her writing into three types: "quill lyrics", songs rooted in antiquated poeticism; "fountain pen lyrics", based on modern and vivid storylines; and "glitter gel pen lyrics", which are lively and frivolous.[386] Critics note the fifth track of every Swift album as the most "emotionally vulnerable" of the album.[387] Awarding her with the Songwriter Icon Award in 2021, the National Music Publishers' Association remarked that "no one is more influential when it comes to writing music today".[388] The Week deemed her the foremost female songwriter of modern times,[389] and the Nashville Songwriters Association International named her Songwriter-Artist of the Decade in 2022.[245] Swift has also published two original poems: "Why She Disappeared" and "If You're Anything Like Me".[390]
Performances
Further information: List of Taylor Swift live performances

Swift performing on the Reputation Stadium Tour in Seattle in May 2018
Journalists have described Swift as one of the best live performers. Often praised for her showmanship and stage presence,[391][392][393][394][395] Swift commands large audiences,[396][397][398] without having to rely on dance like her contemporaries do.[399] According to V magazine's Greg Krelenstein, she possesses "a rare gift of turning a stadium spectacle into an intimate setting", irrespective of whether she is "plucking a guitar or leading an army of dancers".[400] In a 2008 review of Swift's early performances, Sasha Frere-Jones of The New Yorker called Swift a "preternaturally skilled" entertainer with a vibrant stage presence, adding "she returned the crowd's energy with the professionalism she has shown since the age of fourteen."[401] In 2023, Adrian Horton of The Guardian noted her "seemingly endless stamina" on the Eras Tour,[402] and i critic Ilana Kaplan called her showmanship "unparalleled".[403]
Critics have highlighted Swift's versatility as an entertainer, praising her ability to switch onstage personas and performance styles depending on the varying themes and aesthetics of her albums.[404][405] Her concert productions have been characterized by elaborate Broadway theatricality and high technology,[406] and her performances frequently incorporate a live band, with whom she has played and toured since 2007.[407] Swift also often accompanies herself with musical instruments such as electric guitar;[408] acoustic guitar; piano;[409] and sometimes twelve-string guitar,[410][411] banjo,[412] or ukulele.[413] Interacting frequently with the audience, her solo acoustic performances are considered intimate and emotionally resonant, complementing her story-based lyrics and fan connection.[351][414] Lydia Burgham of The Spinoff opined that this intimacy remains "integral to her singer-songwriter origins".[415][409] Chris Willman of Variety called Swift "pop's most approachable superstar",[416] and the 21st century's most popular performer.[417]
Video and film
Further information: Taylor Swift videography
Swift emphasizes visuals as a key creative component of her music-making process.[418] She has collaborated with different directors to produce her music videos, and over time she has become more involved with writing and directing. She developed the concept and treatment for "Mean" in 2011[419] and co-directed the music video for "Mine" with Roman White the year before.[420] In an interview, White said that Swift "was keenly involved in writing the treatment, casting and wardrobe. And she stayed for both the 15-hour shooting days, even when she wasn't in the scenes."[421]
From 2014 to 2018, Swift collaborated with director Joseph Kahn on eight music videos—four each from her albums 1989 and Reputation. Kahn has praised Swift's involvement.[422] She worked with American Express for the "Blank Space" music video (which Kahn directed), and served as an executive producer for the interactive app AMEX Unstaged: Taylor Swift Experience, for which she won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Interactive Program in 2015.[423] Swift produced the music video for "Bad Blood" and won a Grammy Award for Best Music Video in 2016.[424]
Her production company, Taylor Swift Productions, is credited with producing all of her visual media starting with the 2018 concert documentary Reputation Stadium Tour.[425] She continued to co-direct music videos for the Lover singles "Me!" with Dave Meyers, and "You Need to Calm Down" (also serving as a co-executive producer) and "Lover" with Drew Kirsch,[426] but first ventured into sole direction with the video for "The Man" (which won her the MTV Video Music Award for Best Direction).[427] After Folklore: The Long Pond Studio Sessions, Swift debuted as a filmmaker with All Too Well: The Short Film,[245] which made her the first artist to win the Grammy Award for Best Music Video as a sole director.[428] Swift has cited Chloé Zhao, Greta Gerwig, Nora Ephron, Guillermo del Toro, John Cassavetes, and Noah Baumbach as filmmaking influences.[418]
Accolades and achievements
Further information: List of awards and nominations received by Taylor Swift

In 2009, Swift became the first country singer to win an MTV Video Music Award.
Swift's discography is a "critically hailed songbook", as per Time's Sam Lansky.[429] She has won 14 Grammy Awards (including four for Album of the Year—the most won by an artist),[430] an Emmy Award,[431] 40 American Music Awards (the most won by an artist),[432] 39 Billboard Music Awards (the most won by an artist—tying with Drake),[433] 118 Guinness World Records,[434] 23 MTV Video Music Awards (including four Video of the Year wins—the most by an act),[247] 12 Country Music Association Awards (including the Pinnacle Award),[435] eight Academy of Country Music Awards,[436] and two Brit Awards.[168] As a songwriter, she has been honored by the Nashville Songwriters Association,[63][437] the Songwriters Hall of Fame, and the National Music Publishers' Association and was the youngest person on Rolling Stone's list of the 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time in 2015.[438][439] At the 64th BMI Awards in 2016, Swift was the first woman to be honored with an award named after its recipient.[440]
Commercially, from available data, Swift has amassed over 50 million album sales and 150 million single sales as of 2019,[441][442][443] and 114 million units globally, including 78 billion streams as of 2021.[444][445] The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ranked her as the Global Recording Artist of the Year for a record three times (2014, 2019 and 2022).[446] Swift has the most number-one albums in the United Kingdom and Ireland for a female artist this millennium,[447][448] earned the highest income for an artist on Chinese digital music platforms (RMB 159,000,000 as of 2021),[449] and is the first artist to replace themselves at the top spot and occupy the entire top five[note 3] of the Australian albums chart.[452][453] Swift remains the world's highest-grossing female touring act ever, with cumulative ticket sales at $1.96 billion as of November 2023 according to Pollstar.[454] The Eras Tour is the highest-grossing tour of all time as of December 2023, and the first to surpass $1 billion in revenue.[455] Beginning with Fearless, each of her studio albums have opened with over one million global units.[456][457] Swift is the most streamed female act on Spotify and Apple Music.[458][459] On Spotify, she is the only artist to have received more than 200 and 250 million streams in one day (260 million on October 27, 2023),[460] and the only female act to reach 100 million monthly listeners.[234] The most entries and the most simultaneous entries for an artist on the Billboard Global 200, with 143 and 31 songs, respectively, are among her feats.[461][462]
In the US, Swift has sold over 37.3 million albums as of 2019,[443] when Billboard placed her eighth on its Greatest of All Time Artists Chart.[463] Eleven of her songs have topped the Billboard Hot 100.[257] She is the longest-reigning act of the Billboard Artist 100 (97 weeks);[464] the soloist with the most cumulative weeks atop the Billboard 200 (68);[465] the woman with the most Billboard 200 number-ones (13),[234] Hot 100 entries (232),[234][156] number-one debuts (6),[note 4] top-ten songs (49),[257] and weeks atop the Top Country Albums chart (101);[467] and the act with the most number-one songs on Pop Airplay (12) and Digital Songs (28).[468][469] Swift is the first woman to simultaneously chart five albums in the top 10 and eleven albums on the entire Billboard 200;[470][471] and the first act to occupy the top four spots and chart seven albums[note 5] in the top 10 on the Top Album Sales chart.[473][474] She is the second highest-certified female digital singles artist (and fifth overall) in the US, with 137.5 million total units certified by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA),[475] and the first woman to have both an album (Fearless) and a song ("Shake It Off") certified Diamond.[476] Swift is the only artist in Luminate history to have six albums sell over a million copies in a week.[477]
Swift has appeared in various power listings. Time included her on its annual list of the 100 most influential people in 2010, 2015, and 2019.[478] She was one of the "Silence Breakers" that the magazine spotlighted as Person of the Year in 2017 for speaking up about sexual assault,[479] and received the honor again in 2023 for her cultural domination that year.[429] Time described Swift as the first Person of the Year to be recognized for "achievement in the arts", as well as the first woman to be recognized and appear on a Person of the Year cover more than once.[480][481] In 2014, she was named to Forbes' 30 Under 30 list in the music category[482] and again in 2017 in its "All-Star Alumni" category.[483] Swift became the youngest woman to be included on Forbes' list of the 100 most powerful women in 2015, ranked at number 64.[484] In 2023, she was ranked by Forbes as the fifth-most powerful woman in the world, the first entertainer to place in the top five.[485] Swift received an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degree from New York University and served as its commencement speaker on May 18, 2022.[245]
Cultural status
Main articles: Cultural impact of Taylor Swift and Public image of Taylor Swift

Swift at the 2010 Time 100 Gala
Swift has been credited with making a profound impact on the music industry, popular culture and the economy.[486][487] She dominates cultural conversations,[488][489] which has led publications to describe her as a cultural "vitality" or zeitgeist.[490][491][492] Her music, life and public image are points of attention in global celebrity culture.[297] Initially a teen idol,[493] she has been referred to as a pop icon;[312][494] publications describe her immense popularity and longevity as unwitnessed since the 20th century.[495][496] In 2013, New York magazine's Jody Rosen dubbed Swift the "world's biggest pop star" and opined that the trajectory of her stardom has defied established patterns. Rosen added that Swift "falls between genres, eras, demographics, paradigms, trends", leaving her contemporaries "vying for second place".[310] Critics regard Swift as a rare yet successful combination of the pop star and singer-songwriter archetypes.[497]
Her fans are known as Swifties.[266] Billboard noted only few artists have had her chart success, critical acclaim, and fan support.[498] Swift's million-selling albums are considered an anomaly in the streaming-dominated industry following the end of the album era in the 2010s.[499][500] Economist Alan Krueger described Swift as an "economic genius".[501]
Although labeled by the media in her early career as "America's Sweetheart" for her girl next door persona,[502][503] Swift has been accused by detractors of being "calculated" and manipulative of her image, a narrative bolstered by her 2016 dispute with West.[173][174] Critics have also noted that her personal life and career have been subject to intense misogyny and "slut-shaming",[504][505] as well as rampant media scrutiny and tabloid speculation.[506]
Swift's private jet use has drawn scrutiny for its carbon emissions.[507][508] In 2023, a spokesperson for Swift stated that she had purchased more than double the required carbon credits to offset all tour travel and personal flights.[509][510] In December 2023, Swift's lawyers sent a cease and desist letter to American programmer Jack Sweeney over tracking her private jet, citing safety concerns and stalking.[511][512] Swift has been a victim of numerous house break-ins and stalkers, some of whom were armed.[513][514]
Legacy
"You have different artists dominating different sectors of the industry: Some are huge at streaming, some are big draws on the road. But we're at this moment where there's no one better than Taylor Swift, whether that's on the radio, with streaming, ticket sales or just cultural impact."
– Jason Lipshutz, Billboard executive director, 2023[515]
Swift helped shape the modern country music scene,[516] having extended her success beyond the Anglosphere,[310][516] pioneered the use of internet (Myspace) as a marketing tool,[33][53] and introduced the genre to a younger generation.[517][310] Country labels have since become interested in signing young singers who write their own music;[518] her guitar performances contributed to the "Taylor Swift factor", a phenomenon to which an upsurge in guitar sales to women, a previously ignored demographic, is attributed.[519][520]
According to publications, Swift changed the music landscape with her genre transitions, a discography that accommodates cultural shifts,[521] and her ability to popularize any sound in mainstream music.[522] Lyrically, in being personal and vulnerable in her songs, music journalist Nick Catucci opined Swift helped make space for later singers like Billie Eilish, Ariana Grande, and Halsey to do the same.[523] Scholars have highlighted the literary sensibility and poptimist implications of Swift.[355][524] She has been credited with legitimizing and popularizing the concept of album "eras".[525][526] Swift is a subject of academic study and scholarly media research.[297] Various educational institutions offer courses on Swift in literary, cultural and sociopolitical contexts.[527][297]
Swift has influenced numerous music artists, and her albums have inspired a generation of singer-songwriters.[517][320][528] Journalists praise her ability to reform industry practices, noting how her actions changed streaming policies, prompted awareness of intellectual property in new musicians,[529][530] and reshaped ticketing models.[531] Various sources deem Swift's music a paradigm representing the millennial generation;[532] Vox called her the "millennial Bruce Springsteen",[533] and The Times named her "the Bob Dylan of our age".[534] Swift earned the title Woman of the Decade (2010s) from Billboard,[535] Artist of the Decade (2010s) at the American Music Awards,[536] and Global Icon at the Brit Awards for her impact.[445] Senior artists such as Paul McCartney,[537] Mick Jagger,[538] Madonna,[539] and Dolly Parton have praised her musicianship.[540] Carole King regards Swift her "professional grand daughter" and thanked Swift for "carrying the torch forward".[541] Springsteen called her a "tremendous" writer,[542] while Ringo Starr and Billy Joel considered Swift the Beatles' successor.[543][544] Britney Spears labeled Swift "the most iconic pop woman of our generation".[545]
Entrepreneurship
Media outlets describe Swift as a savvy businesswoman;[546][547] in 2024, she topped Billboard's annual Power 100 ranking of the top music industry executives.[548] Swift is known for her traditional album rollouts, consisting of a variety of promotional activities that Rolling Stone termed as an inescapable "multimedia bonanza".[549][550] Easter eggs and cryptic teasers became a common practice in contemporary pop music because of Swift.[551] Publications describe her discography as a music "universe" subject to analyses by fans, critics and journalists.[552][553][554] Swift maintains an active presence on social media and a close relationship with fans, to which many journalists attribute her success.[555][487][556] Her in-house management team is called 13 Management.[557]
Swift has endorsed many brands and businesses, having launched clothing lines with L.E.I. and Stella McCartney,[558][559] designed American Greetings cards and Jakks Pacific dolls,[560][561] released a number of fragrances with Elizabeth Arden,[562] and signed multi-year deals with AT&T and Capital One.[563][564] She was a spokesperson for the National Hockey League's Nashville Predators and Sony Cyber-shot digital cameras,[565][566] and became the global ambassador for New York City in 2014 and Record Store Day in 2022.[567][568]
Social activism
Further information: Political impact of Taylor Swift
Swift identifies as a pro-choice feminist,[569] and is a founding signatory of the Time's Up movement against sexual harassment.[570] Specifically, she criticized the US Supreme Court's decision to end federal abortion rights in 2022.[571] Swift also advocates for LGBT rights,[572] and has called for the passing of the Equality Act, which prohibits discrimination based on sex, sexual orientation, and gender identity.[573][574] She performed during WorldPride NYC 2019 at the Stonewall Inn, a gay rights monument, and has donated to the LGBT organizations Tennessee Equality Project and GLAAD.[575][576][577]
A supporter of the March for Our Lives movement and gun control reform in the US,[578] Swift is a vocal critic of white supremacy, racism, and police brutality.[579][569] Following the George Floyd protests, she donated to the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund and the Black Lives Matter movement,[580] called for the removal of Confederate monuments in Tennessee,[581] and advocated for Juneteenth to become a national holiday.[582] In 2020, Swift urged her fans to check their voter registration ahead of elections, which resulted in 65,000 people registering to vote within one day of her post,[583] and endorsed Joe Biden and Kamala Harris in the US presidential election.[584] She has openly criticized former president Donald Trump.[585]
Wealth
Swift's net worth is estimated by Forbes and Bloomberg News at $1.1 billion as of October 2023, making her the first musician to achieve billionaire status "solely based on her songs and performances".[586][587] Forbes named her the annual top-earning female musician in 2016, 2019, 2021, and 2022.[588] She was the highest-paid celebrity of 2016 with $170 million—a feat recognized by the Guinness World Records as the highest annual earnings ever for a female musician,[589] which she herself surpassed with $185 million in 2019.[590] Overall, Forbes listed Swift as the highest-paid female artist of the 2010s, earning $825 million.[591] She has also developed a real estate portfolio worth $150 million as of 2023, with properties in Nashville; Tribeca, Manhattan; Los Angeles (Samuel Goldwyn Estate); and Rhode Island (High Watch).[592]
Philanthropy
Swift is known for her philanthropic efforts.[593] She ranked first on DoSomething's 2015 "Gone Good" list,[594] having received the Star of Compassion from the Tennessee Disaster Services and the Big Help Award from the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards for her "dedication to helping others" and "inspiring others through action".[595][596] She donated $100,000 to the Red Cross to help the victims of the Iowa flood of 2008.[597] In 2009, she sang at BBC's Children in Need concert and raised £13,000 for the cause.[598] Swift has performed at charity relief events, including Sydney's Sound Relief concert.[599] In response to the May 2010 Tennessee floods, Swift donated $500,000.[600] In 2011, Swift used a dress rehearsal of her Speak Now tour as a benefit concert for victims of recent tornadoes in the US, raising more than $750,000.[601] In 2016, she donated $1 million to Louisiana flood relief efforts and $100,000 to the Dolly Parton Fire Fund.[602][603] Swift donated to food banks after Hurricane Harvey struck Houston in 2017 and at every stop of the Eras Tour in 2023;[604][605] she also directly employed local businesses throughout the tour and gave $55 million in bonus payments to her entire crew.[606][607] Swift donated $1 million for Tennessee tornado relief in 2020 and again in 2023.[608][609]
She is a supporter of the arts. A benefactor of the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame,[610] Swift has donated $75,000 to Nashville's Hendersonville High School to help refurbish the school auditorium,[611] $4 million to build a new education center at the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum in Nashville,[612] $60,000 to the music departments of six US colleges,[613] and $100,000 to the Nashville Symphony.[614] Also a promoter of children's literacy, she has donated money and books to schools around the country.[615][616] In 2007, Swift partnered with the Tennessee Association of Chiefs of Police to launch a campaign to protect children from online predators.[617] She has donated items to several charities for auction, including the UNICEF Tap Project and MusiCares.[618] As recipient of the Academy of Country Music's Entertainer of the Year in 2011, Swift donated $25,000 to St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Tennessee.[619] In 2012, Swift participated in the Stand Up to Cancer telethon, performing the charity single "Ronan", which she wrote in memory of a four-year-old boy who died of neuroblastoma.[620] She has also donated $100,000 to the V Foundation for Cancer Research[621] and $50,000 to the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.[622] Swift has encouraged young people to volunteer in their local communities as part of Global Youth Service Day.[623]
Swift donated to fellow singer-songwriter Kesha to help with her legal battles against Dr. Luke and to actress Mariska Hargitay's Joyful Heart Foundation.[593][624] During the COVID-19 pandemic, Swift donated to the World Health Organization and Feeding America,[625] and supported independent record stores.[626][627] Swift performed "Soon You'll Get Better" on the One World: Together At Home television special, a benefit concert curated by Lady Gaga for Global Citizen to raise funds for the World Health Organization's COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund.[628] In 2018 and 2021, Swift donated to the Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network in honor of Sexual Assault Awareness and Prevention Month.[593][629] She has made donations to her fans several times for their medical or academic expenses.[630] In December 2023, Swift attended Ramy Youssef's fundraiser for the Gaza Strip.[631]
Discography
Main articles: Taylor Swift albums discography, Taylor Swift singles discography, and List of songs by Taylor Swift
Studio albums
Taylor Swift (2006)
Fearless (2008)
Speak Now (2010)
Red (2012)
1989 (2014)
Reputation (2017)
Lover (2019)
Folklore (2020)
Evermore (2020)
Midnights (2022)
The Tortured Poets Department (2024)
Re-recorded albums
Fearless (Taylor's Version) (2021)
Red (Taylor's Version) (2021)
Speak Now (Taylor's Version) (2023)
1989 (Taylor's Version) (2023)
Filmography
Main article: Taylor Swift videography
This section lists select works only. Refer to the main article for further information.
Valentine's Day (2010)
The Lorax (2012)
The Giver (2014)
Cats (2019)
All Too Well: The Short Film (also director) (2021)
Amsterdam (2022)
Documentary and concert films
Journey to Fearless (2010)
Speak Now World Tour – Live (2011)
The 1989 World Tour Live (2015)
Taylor Swift: Reputation Stadium Tour (2018)
Miss Americana (2020)
Taylor Swift: City of Lover (2020)
Folklore: The Long Pond Studio Sessions (also director) (2020)
Taylor Swift: The Eras Tour (2023)
Tours
Main article: List of Taylor Swift live performances
Fearless Tour (2009–2010)
Speak Now World Tour (2011–2012)
The Red Tour (2013–2014)
The 1989 World Tour (2015)
Reputation Stadium Tour (2018)
The Eras Tour (2023–2024)
See also
List of American Grammy Award winners and nominees
List of highest-certified music artists in the United States
List of most-followed Instagram accounts
List of most-followed Twitter accounts
List of most-subscribed YouTube channels
Footnotes
 Swift held the record until the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards in 2020.[91][92]
 Though Swift has properties throughout the US, she identifies Nashville as her home.[149][150]
 Swift has occupied the top five of the ARIA Albums Chart twice. She achieved this feat first on the issue published on July 7, 2023,[450] followed by a second time on the issue published on February 9, 2024.[451]
 In a tie with Ariana Grande.[466]
 Swift has charted seven titles in the top 10 of the Top Album Sales chart twice—on the issues dated January 6, 2024, and January 20, 2024.[472]
References
 "Taylor Swift: The record-breaking artist in numbers". Newsround. March 2, 2020. Archived from the original on March 8, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2020.
 Sutherland, Mark (May 23, 2015). "Taylor Swift interview: 'A relationship? No one's going to sign up for this'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2020.
 Scott, Walter (June 11, 2015). "What Famous Pop Star Is Named After James Taylor?". Parade. Archived from the original on October 15, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2018.
 "Taylor Swift is not an "underdog": The real story about her 1 percent upbringing that the New York Times won't tell you". Salon.com. May 23, 2015. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2020.
 Jepson 2013, p. 1.
 Roth, Madeline (May 19, 2015). "Taylor Swift's Brother Had The Most Epic Graduation Weekend Ever". MTV News. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
 McKay, Gabriel (July 6, 2023). "Taylor Swift Edinburgh: Is star the real queen of Scotland?". The Herald. Archived from the original on February 1, 2024. Retrieved February 4, 2024.
 Eleftheriou-Smith, Loulla-Mae (June 24, 2015). "Taylor Swift tells Scotland: 'I am one of you'". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2019.
 Vadala, Nick (July 14, 2017). "Taylor Swift ancestor's home added to Philly Register of Historic Places". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved January 15, 2021.
 "Taylor Swift's Great-Great-Grandfather's Philly Home Gets Historic Landmark Status". AP NEWS. July 25, 2017. Archived from the original on May 22, 2022. Retrieved January 15, 2021.
 "Taylor Swift stammt aus dem Freistaat" (in German). BR24. September 17, 2015. Archived from the original on December 31, 2021. Retrieved July 23, 2023.
 Widdicombe, Lizzie (October 10, 2011). "You Belong With Me". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on July 24, 2014. Retrieved October 11, 2011.
 Raab, Scott (October 20, 2014). "Taylor Swift Interview". Esquire. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.
 "Taylor Swift on Politicians Co-opting Faith: 'I'm a Christian. That's Not What We Stand For'". Relevant. January 31, 2020. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Retrieved April 2, 2020.
 Uhrich, Bill (February 13, 2010). "Photos Students at Alvernia Montessori School sending Taylor Swift a valentine". Reading Eagle. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved February 25, 2013.
 Hatza, George (December 8, 2008). "Taylor Swift: Growing into superstardom". Reading Eagle. Archived from the original on April 1, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012.
 Mennen, Lauren (November 12, 2014). "Taylor Swift's Wyomissing childhood home on the market for $799,500". Philadelphia Daily News. Archived from the original on October 17, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2016.
 Chang, David (February 22, 2016). "Taylor Swift Returns to Reading Pennsylvania as Maid of Honor in Friend's Wedding". WCAU. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2016.
 "Taylor Swift, Age 12". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2016.
 Cooper, Brittany Joy (April 15, 2012). "Taylor Swift Opens Up About a Future in Acting and Admiration for Emma Stone". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on April 17, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012.
 MacPherson, Alex (October 18, 2012). "Taylor Swift: 'I want to believe in pretty lies'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
 Rolling Stone Interview: The Unabridged Taylor Swift, December 2, 2008
 Morris, Edward (December 1, 2006). "When She Thinks 'Tim McGraw', Taylor Swift Savors Payoff: Hardworking Teen to Open for George Strait Next Year". CMT. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2010.
 Diu, Nisha Lilia (April 3, 2011). "Taylor Swift: 'I won't do sexy shoots'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on May 6, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2012.
 "News : CMT Insider Interview: Taylor Swift (Part 1 of 2)". CMT. November 26, 2008. Archived from the original on January 23, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 Malec, Jim (May 2, 2011). "Taylor Swift: The Garden In The Machine". American Songwriter. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
 Qureshi, Hira. "Visit this Stone Harbor café where Taylor Swift was 'always coming in to play' as a child". Courier-Post. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved December 12, 2022.
 Kuperinsky, Amy (July 28, 2020). "Taylor Swift shouts out Jersey Shore town in video for surprise album". NJ.com. Archived from the original on December 12, 2022. Retrieved December 12, 2022.
 Martino, Andy (January 10, 2015). "EXCLUSIVE: The real story of Taylor Swift's guitar 'legend'". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2017.
 "Dymtrow v. Swift et al: Federal Civil LawsuitNew York Southern District Court, Case No. 1:07-cv-11277-RJS" (PDF). American Bar Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 11, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012.
 "On tour with Taylor Swift". NBC News. May 31, 2009. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 Castro, Vicky (February 6, 2015). "How to Succeed as an Entrepreneur, Taylor Swift Style". Inc. Archived from the original on June 7, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2015.
 Willman, Chris (July 25, 2007). "Getting to know Taylor Swift". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved January 25, 2022.
 Jo, Nancy (January 2, 2014). "Taylor Swift and the Growing of a Superstar: Her Men, Her Moods, Her Music". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 10, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015.
 "News : Taylor Swift's High School Names Auditorium in Her Honor". CMT. September 23, 2010. Archived from the original on November 21, 2014. Retrieved April 18, 2012.
 Grigoriadis, Vanessa (March 5, 2009). "The Very Pink, Very Perfect Life of Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved July 28, 2019.
 "Taylor Swift receives her high school diploma". Houston Chronicle. July 27, 2008. Archived from the original on January 1, 2024. Retrieved January 2, 2024.
 "Taylor Swift: The Garden In The Machine". American Songwriter. May 2, 2011. Archived from the original on August 7, 2013. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
 "Songwriter Taylor Swift Signs Publishing Deal With Sony/ATV". Broadcast Music, Inc. May 12, 2005. Archived from the original on December 4, 2012. Retrieved April 20, 2012.
 Kosser, Michael (June 3, 2010). "Liz Rose: Co-Writer to the Stars". American Songwriter. Archived from the original on December 24, 2011. Retrieved April 19, 2012.
 Leahey, Andrew (October 24, 2014). "Songwriter Spotlight: Liz Rose". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 26, 2016. Retrieved September 24, 2016.
 DeLuca, Dan (November 11, 2008). "Focused on 'great songs' Taylor Swift isn't thinking about 'the next level' or Joe Jon as gossip". Philadelphia Daily News. p. 1. Archived from the original on November 18, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012.
 Preston, John (April 26, 2009). "Taylor Swift: the 19-year-old country music star conquering America – and now Britain". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 5, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012.
 Rosa, Christopher (March 24, 2015). "Opening Acts Who Became Bigger Than The Headliner". VH1. Archived from the original on November 10, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015.
 Rapkin, Mickey (July 27, 2017). "Oral History of Nashville's Bluebird Cafe: Taylor Swift, Maren Morris, Dierks Bentley & More on the Legendary Venue". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved July 28, 2017.
 Hiatt, Brian (October 25, 2012). "Taylor Swift in Wonderland". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 31, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
 Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (June 26, 2013). "Toby Keith, Cowboy Capitalist: Country's $500 Million Man". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
 Taylor Swift (CD). Big Machine Records. 2006. BMR120702.
 Tamarkin, Jeff. "Taylor Swift – Taylor Swift". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 20, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 Neal, Chris (December 4, 2006). "Taylor Swift Review". Country Weekly. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012. Retrieved March 31, 2010.
 Trust, Gary (October 29, 2009). "Chart Beat Thursday: Taylor Swift, Tim McGraw Linked Again". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 7, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2016.
 "Taylor Swift". Songwriters' Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2022.
 Willman, Chris (February 5, 2008). "Taylor Swift's Road to Fame". Entertainment Weekly. p. 3. Archived from the original on February 21, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift Joins Rascal Flatts Tour". CMT. October 18, 2006. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2010.
 Whitaker, Sterling; Hammar, Ania (May 27, 2019). "How Eric Church's Rascal Flatts Feud Helped Launch Taylor Swift's Career". Taste of Country. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on June 6, 2019. Retrieved June 10, 2019.
 "Taylor Swift No. 1 on iTunes". Great American Country. December 19, 2007. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 "Taylor Swift – Chart history". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016.
 "Taylor Swift owns top of country chart". Country Standard Time. July 23, 2008. Archived from the original on July 31, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2008.
 "Wal-Mart "Eyes" New Taylor Swift Project". Great American Country. Archived from the original on July 23, 2008. Retrieved July 24, 2008.
 "Taylor Swift Joins George Strait's 2007 Tour". CMT. November 17, 2006. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved February 16, 2020.
 "Brad Paisley Plans Tour With Three Opening Acts". CMT. January 9, 2007. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved February 16, 2020.
 "Taylor Swift Joins Tim McGraw, Faith Hill on Tour". CMT. June 1, 2007. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved February 16, 2020.
 "Taylor Swift Youngest Winner of Songwriter/Artist Award". Great American Country. October 16, 2007. Archived from the original on January 11, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2015.
 "Photos : All Taylor Swift Pictures : Horizon Award Winner Poses in the Pressroom". CMT. September 7, 2007. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
 "Photos : 43rd Annual ACM Awards – Onstage: Winners : Acceptance Speech". CMT. May 18, 2008. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift, Rascal Flatts, Carrie Underwood Score at 2008 AMA Awards" (Blog). Roughstock.com. November 24, 2008. Archived from the original on July 10, 2014. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
 "Amy Winehouse Wins Best New Artist, Kanye West Pays Tribute to Mom – Grammy Awards 2008, Grammy Awards". People. October 2, 2008. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
 "Rascal Flatts Announce Summer Tour With Taylor Swift". CMT. May 5, 2008. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved June 5, 2019.
 Caplan, David (September 8, 2008). "Scoop". People. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved March 6, 2012.
 Rizzo, Monica (November 24, 2008). "Scoop – Couples, Camilla Belle, Joe Jonas". People. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 6, 2012.
 Akers, Shelley (June 9, 2008). "Taylor Swift to Appear in Hannah Montana Movie". People. Archived from the original on October 27, 2017. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
 "Hannah Montana: The Movie (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by Hannah Montana". iTunes Store. January 2009. Archived from the original on May 2, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
 "CD Taylor Swift – Fearless" (in Portuguese). Universal Music Group. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 Raphael, Amy (February 1, 2009). "First, she conquered Nashville. Now she's set for world domination". The Observer. ProQuest 250507223. Archived from the original on December 9, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2022.
 Widdicombe, Lizzie (October 10, 2011). "You Belong with Me". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on July 24, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2014.
 "Discography Taylor Swift". ARIA Charts. Archived from the original on March 21, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2010.
 Trust, Gary (December 15, 2009). "Best of 2009: Part 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 3, 2013. Retrieved September 20, 2022.
 Ben-Yehuda, Ayala (August 13, 2009). "Black Eyed Peas, Jason Mraz Tie Records on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2010.
 Trust, Gary (September 24, 2009). "Taylor Swift Climbs Hot 100, Black Eyed Peas Still No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 1, 2013. Retrieved September 20, 2022.
 "Taylor Swift Chart History (Hot Country Songs)". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 Grein, Paul (March 16, 2012). "Chart Watch Extra: Top Albums Of Last 10 Years" (Blog). Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved June 10, 2011.
 Mapes, Jillian (November 23, 2010). "Taylor Swift Announces 'Speak Now' World Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2012.
 Weiss, Dan (December 12, 2011). "Taylor Swift: Journey To Fearless DVD". American Songwriter. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
 Ryan, Sarah (August 10, 2009). "Taylor Swift Pranks Keith Urban" (Blog). Great American Country. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015.
 "Kanye calls Taylor Swift after 'View' appearance". MSNBC. September 15, 2009. Archived from the original on October 6, 2013. Retrieved September 16, 2009.
 "Taylor Swift Thanks "Gracious" Beyonce for Inviting Her Onstage After Kanye Stunt at VMAs". Rolling Stone. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on June 15, 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2012.
 Anderson, Kyle (September 16, 2009). "Kanye West's VMA Interruption Gives Birth To Internet Photo Meme". MTV. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved October 3, 2009.
 Ditzian, Eric (2009). "Taylor Swift, Michael Jackson Big Winners at American Music Awards". MTV. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2012.
 "2009 Artists of the Year". Billboard. December 10, 2009. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift Raps 'Thug Story' With T-Pain On CMT Awards". MTV. June 17, 2009. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved November 11, 2015.
 Kreps, Daniel (February 1, 2010). "Beyonce, Taylor Swift Dominate 2010 Grammy Awards". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. Retrieved February 13, 2012.
 "Billie Eilish replaces Taylor Swift as youngest artist to win a Grammy for Album of the Year". MSN. January 27, 2020. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020.
 Kaufman, Gil (November 12, 2009). "Taylor Swift Dominates CMA Awards". MTV News. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2016.
 Vena, Jocelyn (November 6, 2009). "John Mayer Talks Taylor Swift Collaboration 'Half of My Heart'". MTV. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2012.
 "Boys Like Girls featuring Taylor Swift, 'Two Is Better Than One'". Billboard. December 2, 2009. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved December 4, 2020.
 "Kellie Pickler Has Her 'Best Days' Thanks To Taylor Swift". MTV. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2015.
 Vena, Jocelyn (December 28, 2009). "New Taylor Swift Song Included In 'Valentine's Day' Featurette". MTV. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2015.
 "Taylor Swift – Chart history on Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
 Park, Michael Y.; Sia, Nicole (December 29, 2009). "Taylor & Taylor Romance Was Overblown, Says Source". People. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved March 6, 2012.
 Caramanica, Jon (March 6, 2009). "OMG! Taylor Swift Does 'CSI'!". The New York Times (Blog). Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Retrieved May 7, 2012.
 Strecker, Erin (January 2, 2015). "Remember When Taylor Swift Shined as 'Saturday Night Live' Host?". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 24, 2015. Retrieved January 15, 2015.
 Dukes, Billy (October 22, 2012). "10 Things You Didn't Know About Taylor Swift". Taste of Country. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on May 22, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2020.
 Pietroluongo, Silvio (August 11, 2010). "Taylor Swift Makes Sparkling Hot 100 Entrance". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
 Caramanica, Jon (October 20, 2010). "Taylor Swift, Angry on 'Speak Now'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010. Retrieved October 23, 2010.
 "Taylor Swift's New Album, Speak Now, Set for Oct. 25 Release". CMT. July 20, 2010. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2020.
 Kaufman, Gil (November 3, 2010). "Taylor Swift's Speak Now Tops 1 Million in First Week". MTV. Archived from the original on August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016.
 "Fastest-selling digital album in the US by a female artist". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015.
 Knopper, Steve (November 25, 2010). "Taylor Swift's Speak Now Tops the Charts". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved November 25, 2010.
 Sheffield, Rob (October 26, 2010). "Speak Now (2010)". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 11, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2019.
 Hammel, Sara (January 4, 2011). "Taylor Swift & Jake Gyllenhaal Break Up: Source". People. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved March 6, 2012.
 Wyland, Sarah (February 12, 2012). "Taylor Swift Takes Home Two GRAMMYs at Tribute-Filled Show" (Blog). Great American Country. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2012.
 Shelburne, Craig (October 18, 2010). "Taylor Swift Named NSAI's Songwriter-Artist of the Year". CMT. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2015.
 Smith, Hazel (October 24, 2011). "News : Hot Dish: Taylor Swift Sings Alan Jackson's Masterpiece at Nashville Songwriters Celebration". CMT. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved April 22, 2012.
 Roland, Tom (December 2, 2011). "Taylor Swift: Billboard's Woman of the Year". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2012.
 Talbott, Chris; Silva, Cristina (April 2, 2012). "Taylor Swift wins ACM entertainer of the year". Yahoo!. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 23, 2016. Retrieved May 15, 2012.
 "CMA Awards 2011: Taylor Swift wins entertainer of the year". CBS News. November 9, 2011. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2012.
 Kellogg, Jane (November 20, 2011). "AMAs 2011: Winners and Nominees Complete List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015.
 Sheffield, Rob (June 23, 2012). "Women Who Rock: The 50 Greatest Albums of All Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 10, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2017.
 Allen, Bob (March 29, 2012). "Hot Tours: Taylor Swift, George Strait, Cirque Du Soleil". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 21, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift News and Blog". taylorswift.com. September 21, 2011. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved September 21, 2011.
 Herrera, Monica (March 15, 2012). "Taylor Swift, Arcade Fire Talk 'Hunger Games'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved May 10, 2012.
 "Nominations 2013 — Golden Globe Awards". goldenglobes.org. December 13, 2012. Archived from the original on December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 13, 2012.
 Horowitz, Steven J. (April 20, 2012). "B.o.B Explains Origins of Taylor Swift Collaboration 'Both of Us'". HipHopDX. Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2012.
 Toomedy, Alyssa (October 25, 2012). "Taylor Swift and Conor Kennedy Breakup: Anatomy of a Split". E! News. Archived from the original on December 4, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2015.
 Trust, Gary (August 22, 2012). "Taylor Swift Scores First Hot 100 No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 13, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2012.
 "Discography Taylor Swift". New Zealand Charts. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved July 26, 2016.
 Lynch, Kevin (September 4, 2013). "Calvin Harris trumps Michael Jackson feat to join Taylor Swift, Rihanna and One Direction in Guinness World Records™ 2014 book". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015.
 Chart positions:
 • "Taylor Swift – I Knew You Were Trouble". ARIA Charts. Archived from the original on May 27, 2016. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 • "Official Singles Charts Top 100". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 • "Taylor Swift Leads Record Breaking Digital Sales Week". Billboard. January 3, 2013. Archived from the original on April 8, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 Lewis, Randy (October 30, 2012). "Taylor Swift raises the bar with a savvy 'Red' marketing campaign". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2020. Retrieved December 28, 2020.
 Mansfield, Brian (October 17, 2012). "Taylor Swift sees 'Red' all over". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012.
 English, J. (August 28, 2017). "Taylor Swift's 'Red': A Canonical Coming-Of-Age Album". NPR. Archived from the original on April 12, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 Roberts, Randall (October 31, 2012). "'The Last Time' connects Taylor Swift with Arcade Fire". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2020.
 Greenwald, David (September 6, 2013). "Taylor Swift, Rihanna, Justin Bieber Among 2014 Guinness Record-Setters". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 8, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2016.
 Sexton, Paul (August 31, 2019). "Taylor Swift Scores Fourth U.K. No. 1 With 'Lover' Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved October 15, 2019.
 "Grammys 2014: The complete list of nominees and winners". Los Angeles Times. January 26, 2014. Archived from the original on March 4, 2015. Retrieved January 25, 2015.
 Gregoire, Carolyn (November 19, 2012). "Taylor Swift AMA Awards 2012: Pop Star Performs 'I Knew You Were Trouble' (Video)". HuffPost. Archived from the original on May 26, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013.
 Payne, Chris (November 25, 2013). "Taylor Swift & Justin Timberlake Win Big at American Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 24, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015.
 "NSAI Songwriter/Artists of the Year". Nashville Songwriters Association International. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
 Allen, Bob (July 3, 2014). "Taylor Swift's Red Wraps as All-Time Country Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.
 Caramanica, Jon (November 7, 2013). "Country Awards Hold Swift Close". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved April 3, 2014.
 "Taylor Swift's Boyfriend Timeline: 10 Relationships & Their Songs". Billboard. December 30, 2014. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2016.
 Labrecque, Jeff (December 12, 2013). "'12 Years a Slave' and 'American Hustle' lead Golden Globe nominees". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 23, 2015. Retrieved December 12, 2013.
 Bonaguro, Alison (January 25, 2013). "News : Offstage: Tim McGraw Wanted to Make Taylor Swift Duet an Event". CMT. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved February 25, 2013.
 Blistein, Doyle (June 4, 2013). "Taylor Swift Joins Rolling Stones for 'As Tears Go By'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013.
 "Taylor Swift Joins Florida Georgia Line Onstage for 'Cruise'". Taste of Country. Townsquare Media. March 2, 2013. Archived from the original on March 16, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2013.
 Collin, Robbie (July 26, 2012). "The Lorax, review". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
 Beard, Lanford (May 1, 2013). "Taylor Swift says 'I do' to 'New Girl'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 8, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016.
 Busis, Hillary (September 27, 2013). "Taylor Swift will co-star in long-awaited adaptation of 'The Giver'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
 Peterson, Price (March 31, 2014). "Taylor Swift Moves into NYC Apartment Built Over Mysterious River of Pink Slime". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016.
 Rogers, Alex (March 7, 2014). "Why Taylor Swift Thinks Nashville Is the Best Place on Earth". Time. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2016.
 Milzoff, Rebecca; Brown, Eric Renner; Denis, Kyle (August 24, 2023). "Taylor Swift and Beyoncé Are So Big, Even Their Publicists Have Fans". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 24, 2023. Retrieved August 24, 2023.
 Zollo, Paul (February 17, 2016). "The Oral History of Taylor Swift's 1989". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on June 3, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 Stutz, Colin (October 16, 2014). "Watch Taylor Swift's '1989' Secret Sessions Behind The Scenes Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 5, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
 Caulfield, Keith (November 4, 2014). "Taylor Swift's "1989" debuts with 1.287 million copies sold". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014.
 Chart positions:
 • "Discography Taylor Swift". ARIA Charts. Archived from the original on August 26, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 • "Taylor Swift Chart History (Canadian Hot 100)". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved February 14, 2021.
 • "Taylor Swift's 'Bad Blood' Blasts to No. 1 on Hot 100". Billboard. May 28, 2015. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved May 28, 2015.
 "Taylor Swift – Chart History: Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2016.
 "Live Music's $20 Billion Year: The Grateful Dead's Fare Thee Well Reunion, Taylor Swift, One Direction Top Boxscore's Year-End". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 14, 2015.
 Weissmann, Jordan (July 7, 2014). "Taylor Swift Has Written an Op-Ed in the Wall Street Journal". Slate (Blog). Archived from the original on January 23, 2015. Retrieved January 23, 2015.
 Knopper, Steve (November 8, 2014). "Taylor Swift's Label Head Explains Spotify Removal". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 21, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.
 Peters, Mitchell (June 21, 2015). "Taylor Swift Pens Open Letter Explaining Why '1989' Won't Be on Apple Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015.
 Halperin, Shirley (June 21, 2015). "Apple Changes Course After Taylor Swift Open Letter: Will Pay Labels During Free Trial". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015.
 Rosen, Christopher (June 25, 2015). "Taylor Swift is putting 1989 on Apple Music". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 25, 2015.
 "Taylor Swift returns to Spotify on the day Katy Perry's album comes out". BBC News. June 9, 2017. Archived from the original on June 9, 2017.
 "Taylor Swift: 2014 Billboard Woman of the Year". Billboard. October 10, 2014. Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.
 Payne, Chris (November 23, 2014). "Taylor Swift Wins Dick Clark Award of Excellence at 2014, Presented by Diana Ross". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.
 "The Taylor Swift Experience". GRAMMY Museum. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Retrieved April 22, 2022.
 Boehrer, Kat (January 7, 2016). "Watch Taylor Swift's Stunning Acoustic Performance of 'Blank Space' at the Grammy Museum". Complex. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved April 22, 2022.
 Jonze, Tim (February 25, 2015). "Taylor Swift wins international female solo artist at Brit awards 2015". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2015.
 Stutz, Colin (July 21, 2015). "2015 MTV Video Music Awards Nominees Revealed: Taylor Swift, Kendrick Lamar, Ed Sheeran & More". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 24, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2016.
 Lynch, Joe (February 19, 2016). "Taylor Swift Joins Elite Club to Win Grammy Album of the Year More Than Once: See the Rest". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 1, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016.
 Chiu, Melody (June 1, 2016). "Taylor Swift and Calvin Harris Split After 15 Months Together". People. Archived from the original on June 22, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2016.
 Spanos, Brittany (July 13, 2016). "Taylor Swift Co-Wrote Calvin Harris' Smash Hit 'This Is What You Came For'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016.
 Grady, Constance (August 26, 2019). "How the Taylor Swift-Kanye West VMAs scandal became a perfect American morality tale". Vox. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved October 12, 2023.
 Grady, Constance (March 21, 2020). "Newly leaked footage shows Taylor Swift and Kanye West talking "Famous"". Vox. Archived from the original on March 24, 2022. Retrieved October 12, 2023.
 Lewis, Anna (July 15, 2016). "Tom Hiddleston finally tells us the truth about his relationship with Taylor Swift". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved January 8, 2019.
 "Taylor Swift Finally Reveals When She Started Dating Joe Alwyn in Lover Album". Yahoo!. August 23, 2019. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved June 11, 2020.
 "Paul McCartney & Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. November 13, 2020. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved September 15, 2021. McCartney: So how does that go? Does your partner sympathize with that and understand? Swift: Oh, absolutely.
 Irvin, Jack (April 10, 2023). "Inside Taylor Swift and Joe Alwyn's 'Differences' That Led to Their Breakup: Sources (Exclusive)". People. Archived from the original on September 25, 2023. Retrieved September 25, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift, pop princess, wins song of the year at the CMA Awards". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 9, 2017. Retrieved November 9, 2017.
 Trust, Gary (February 21, 2017). "Ed Sheeran Tops Hot 100, Katy Perry Debuts at No. 4 & Bruno Mars, Rihanna & The Weeknd All Hit Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 22, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2017.
 Grady, Constance (August 11, 2017). "Taylor Swift won her day in court. Here's what you need to know". Vox. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift wipes social media profiles, fuelling expectations of new album". The Daily Telegraph. August 18, 2017. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2019.
 Aswad, Jem (August 24, 2017). "Taylor Swift's New Single, 'Look What You Made Me Do,' Arrives (Listen)". Variety. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017.
 White, Jack (September 1, 2017). "Taylor Swift scores first Number 1 on the Official Singles Chart with 'LWYMMD'". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017.
 Peak positions:
 • "Taylor Swift Scores Fifth No. 1 Single". Australian Recording Industry Association. September 2, 2017. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2017.
 • "IRMA – Irish Charts". Irish Recorded Music Association. Archived from the original on June 14, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2017.
 • "NZ Top 40 Singles Chart". Recorded Music NZ. September 4, 2017. Archived from the original on September 1, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017.
 • "Taylor Swift at Nos. 1 & 4 on Billboard Hot 100, as Cardi B Moves Up to No. 2". Billboard. September 11, 2017. Archived from the original on September 21, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2017.
 Shaw, Lucas (November 7, 2017). "Taylor Swift Will Keep New Album From Streaming for a Week". Bloomberg. Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on November 8, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2017.
 Powers, Ann (November 10, 2019). "The Old Taylor's Not Dead". NPR. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2020.
 McDermott, Maeve (October 11, 2017). "Taylor Swift 'Reputation': Here's what critics are saying". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 4, 2020. Retrieved October 15, 2020.
 "Official: Taylor Swift's 'Reputation' Album Sells 1.2M Copies in US During First Week". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2018.
 Chart positions:
 • "Taylor Swift's 'Reputation' Rules Australia's Albums Chart". Billboard. November 20, 2017. Archived from the original on November 20, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2017.
 • "Taylor Swift Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved November 19, 2021.
 Unterberger, Andrew (July 6, 2018). "Taylor Swift's 'Delicate' Became the Biggest Reputation Radio Hit While You Weren't Looking". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 13, 2020. Retrieved April 13, 2020.
 "61st Grammy Nominees". The Recording Academy. December 7, 2018. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018.
 Hudak, Joseph (April 12, 2018). "Sugarland Announce New Album Bigger, Taylor Swift Collaboration". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 14, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2018.
 Havens, Lyndsey (October 9, 2018). "Taylor Swift Breaks an All-Time AMA Record – And Urges People to Vote in Midterm Elections". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 10, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018.
 Stubblebine, Allison (November 13, 2017). "Taylor Swift Announces First Round of Reputation Stadium Tour Dates". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. Retrieved November 18, 2017.
 Frankenberg, Eric (December 6, 2018). "Taylor Swift Closes Reputation Stadium Tour with $345 Million". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 9, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 Wang, Amy X. (November 19, 2018). "Taylor Swift's New Record Deal Affects Thousands of Other Musicians". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 26, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2018.
Willman, Chris (August 27, 2018). "Taylor Swift Stands to Make Music Business History as a Free Agent". Variety. Archived from the original on August 29, 2018. Retrieved August 29, 2018.
Aswad, Jem; Willman, Chris (November 19, 2018). "Taylor Swift Signs New Deal With Universal Music Group". Variety. Archived from the original on November 19, 2018. Retrieved November 19, 2018.
 Grady, Constance (November 19, 2018). "What Taylor Swift's new record deal means for the music industry — and for her image". Vox. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved December 20, 2021.
 McKenna, Lyndsey (August 23, 2019). "Stream Taylor Swift's New Album, 'Lover'". NPR. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved September 10, 2019.
 Catucci, Nick (August 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift Reaches For New Heights of Personal and Musical Liberation on 'Lover'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 23, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2021.
 Caulfield, Keith (September 1, 2019). "Official: Taylor Swift's 'Lover' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart With 867,000 Units Earned in First Week in U.S." Billboard. Archived from the original on September 1, 2019. Retrieved September 2, 2019.
 White, Adam (August 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift Lover Review Round-Up: Critics Say Album Feels 'Evolutionary Rather Than Revolutionary'". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022.
 Moniuszko, Sara M. (August 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift Lover Reviews: Critics Are Enamored by the 'Earnest,' 'Romantic' New Album". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 23, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2020.
 Trust, Gary (May 6, 2019). "Lil Nas X's 'Old Town Road' Tops Billboard Hot 100 For Fifth Week, Taylor Swift's 'Me!' Vaults to No. 2". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 6, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 Trust, Gary (October 23, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 'Cruel Summer' Hits No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100, Becoming Her 10th Leader". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 24, 2023. Retrieved October 24, 2023.
 "Arashi Best-Of Tops Taylor Swift for IFPI's Best-Selling Album of 2019". Billboard. March 19, 2020. Archived from the original on March 19, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020.
 "2020 Grammy Awards: Complete Winners List". The Recording Academy. November 20, 2019. Archived from the original on May 22, 2020. Retrieved February 15, 2021.
 Grein, Paul (August 26, 2019). "12 Records That Were Set at the 2019 VMAs". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 30, 2020. Retrieved January 11, 2020.
 Grady, Constance (September 1, 2019). "The Taylor Swift/Scooter Braun controversy, explained". Vox. Archived from the original on February 11, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2019.
 Beth, John (January 2, 2024). "Taylor Swift's Chart Triumph". Square News.
 "The Taylor Swift, Scooter Braun, Justin Bieber row explained". BBC News. July 1, 2019. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021.
 Willman, Chris (November 16, 2020). "Taylor Swift Confirms Sale of Her Masters, Says She Is Already Re-Recording Her Catalog". Variety. Archived from the original on December 3, 2022. Retrieved November 18, 2020.
 Aniftos, Rania (November 15, 2019). "Taylor Swift Releases 'Beautiful Ghosts,' Co-Written With Andrew Lloyd Webber for 'Cats' Film". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 19, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2019.
 "Golden Globes 2020: full list of nominations". The Guardian. December 9, 2019. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved December 20, 2019.
 Rooney, David (December 18, 2019). "'Cats': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 20, 2019. Retrieved December 21, 2019.
 Mamo, Heran (January 15, 2020). "Taylor Swift Miss Americana Netflix Doc Has a Release Date & We're So Ready for It". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2020.
 Willman, Chris (February 6, 2020). "Taylor Swift Moves to Universal Music Publishing Group with New Pact". Variety. Archived from the original on February 12, 2020. Retrieved February 6, 2020.
 Opperman, Jeff (March 12, 2021). "Taylor Swift Is Singing Us Back to Nature". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021.
 "Taylor Swift to release surprise ninth album 'Evermore' tonight". NME. December 10, 2020. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020.
 Atkinson, Katie (December 15, 2020). "Taylor Swift Isn't So Sure She & Joe Alwyn Would Have Made Music Together If It Weren't for Lockdown". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved February 18, 2021.
 Schaffer, Claire (December 18, 2020). "Aaron Dessner on How His Collaborative Chemistry With Taylor Swift Led to Evermore". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2021.
 Barna, Alyssa (December 16, 2020). "These are the musicological reasons Taylor Swift's new album sounds dull". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2021.
 Snapes, Laura (October 14, 2022). "'Genuine': why Taylor Swift can celebrate more than an album release". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 14, 2022. Retrieved October 14, 2022.
 McGrath 2023, p. 79; Fogarty & Arnold 2021, p. 5.
 Trust, Gary (January 28, 2021). "Taylor Swift's 'Coney Island' and 'No Body, No Crime' Debut on Airplay Charts, Joining 'Willow'". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2021.
 Willman, Chris (March 14, 2021). "Taylor Swift Becomes First Woman to Win Album of the Year Grammy Three Times". Variety. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2021.
 Caulfield, Keith (January 7, 2021). "Lil Baby's My Turn Is MRC Data's Top Album of 2020, Roddy Ricch's 'The Box' Most-Streamed Song". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 7, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2021.
 Trust, Gary (December 21, 2020). "Taylor Swift's 'Willow' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2021.
 Willman, Chris (November 23, 2020). "Taylor Swift Wins Three American Music Awards, Says She's MIA Because of 'Recording All of My Old Music'". Variety. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved November 25, 2020.
 Christman, Ed (July 19, 2021). "Billboard's U.S. Money Makers: The Top Paid Musicians of 2020". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 24, 2021. Retrieved July 19, 2021.
 • Christman, Ed (July 19, 2021). "Billboard's 2020 Global Money Makers: The 5 Top Highest Paid Musicians". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 23, 2021. Retrieved July 19, 2021.
 Caulfield, Keith (July 11, 2023). "Taylor Swift's Re-Recorded Speak Now Already Has 2023's Biggest Week After 4 Days of Release". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 11, 2023. Retrieved July 11, 2023.
 Caulfield, Keith (April 18, 2021). "Taylor Swift's Re-Recorded Fearless Album Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart With Year's Biggest Week". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021.
 Asker, Jim; Trust, Gary (February 22, 2021). "Taylor Swift's 'Love Story (Taylor's Version)' Debuts at No. 1 on Hot Country Songs Chart: 'I'm So Grateful to the Fans'". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
 McCluskey, Megan (December 8, 2023). "Breaking Down Taylor Swift's 2023 Impact By the Numbers". Time. Archived from the original on December 26, 2023. Retrieved December 26, 2023.
 Horton, Adrian; Lee, Benjamin (February 6, 2023). "Grammy awards 2023: list of winners". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 6, 2023.
 Corcoran, Nina (August 28, 2022). "Taylor Swift Announces New Album Midnights, Breaks Record for Most Video of the Year Wins at 2022 VMAs". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on August 29, 2022. Retrieved August 28, 2022.
 "Taylor Swift's new album breaks Spotify streaming record". The Guardian. October 22, 2022. Archived from the original on October 22, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022.
 Harvilla, Rob (October 25, 2022). "The Anti-Hero We Deserve: Taylor Swift and Her Polarizing 'Midnights'". The Ringer. Archived from the original on November 3, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2022.
 Light, Alan (October 24, 2022). "Taylor Swift's Midnights Does Something Astonishing. Even For Her". Esquire. Archived from the original on January 17, 2023. Retrieved January 17, 2023.
 Petridis, Alexis (October 21, 2022). "Taylor Swift: Midnights Review – Small-Hours Pop Rich with Self-Loathing and Stereotype-Smashing". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 22, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2022.
 Spanos, Brittany (October 21, 2022). "Taylor Swift Lets Us Into Her Darkest Dreams On Midnights". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 21, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2022.
 Sheffield, Rob (October 21, 2022). "Welcome to the Lavender Labyrinth: Taylor Swift's Midnights Is the Mastermind's Ultimate Power Move". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 22, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022.
 Balasaygun, Kaitlin (November 1, 2022). "How Taylor Swift went back to the past and turned Midnights into her biggest album success yet". CNBC. Archived from the original on December 30, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2022.
 Shafer, Ellise (October 21, 2022). "Taylor Swift's Midnights Breaks Spotify Record for Most-Streamed Album in a Single Day". Variety. Archived from the original on October 21, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022.
 Dailey, Hannah (December 6, 2022). "Here Are All of Taylor Swift's Biggest Accomplishments in 2022". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 30, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2022.
 Trust, Gary (June 5, 2023). "Morgan Wallen's 'Last Night' No. 1 on Hot 100 for Ninth Week, Taylor Swift & Ice Spice's 'Karma' Blasts to No. 2". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved August 21, 2023.
 Blistein, Jon; Guglielmi, Jodi (September 13, 2023). "Taylor Swift Makes History at 2023 VMAs". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 13, 2023. Retrieved September 13, 2023.
 West, Bryan (February 5, 2024). "Taylor Swift makes Grammys history with fourth album of the year win for Midnights". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 5, 2024. Retrieved February 5, 2024.
 Caulfield, Keith (July 16, 2023). "Taylor Swift's Re-Recorded 'Speak Now' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 With 2023's Biggest Week". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Retrieved July 16, 2023.
 Caulfield, Keith (November 5, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 1989 (Taylor's Version) Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 With Biggest Week in Nearly a Decade". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 5, 2023. Retrieved November 5, 2023.
 Sherman, Maria (November 29, 2023). "Taylor Swift is Spotify's most-streamed artist of 2023, ending Bad Bunny's 3-year reign". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved November 29, 2023.
 Garcia, Thania (November 28, 2023). "Taylor Swift Named Apple Music's Artist of the Year; Morgan Wallen Tops Global Songs Chart". Variety. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved November 29, 2023.
 "Best of 2023 (Taylor's Version) Playlist on Amazon Music". Curated by Amazon's Music Experts. Amazon Music. Retrieved December 3, 2023. Our most streamed artist of 2023 globally. It's Taylor's world and we are just living for it.
 Caulfield, Keith (November 21, 2023). "Taylor Swift Is Billboard's Top Artist of 2023". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2023. Retrieved November 21, 2023.
 Caulfield, Keith (December 3, 2023). "Taylor Swift's '1989 (Taylor's Version)' Returns to No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Retrieved December 3, 2023.
 Caulfield, Keith (January 10, 2024). "Morgan Wallen's One Thing at a Time Is Luminate's Top Album of 2023 in U.S." Billboard. Archived from the original on January 10, 2024. Retrieved January 12, 2024.
 Trust, Gary (November 6, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 'Is It Over Now? (Taylor's Version)' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved November 6, 2023.
 Cohen, Jonathan (June 29, 2021). "Aaron Dessner, Justin Vernon Rev Up Big Red Machine With Help From Taylor Swift". Variety. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved February 10, 2022.
 Strauss, Matthew (February 19, 2021). "HAIM Enlist Taylor Swift for New "Gasoline" Remix". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2022.
 Dailey, Hannah (February 11, 2022). "Ed Sheeran & Taylor Swift Release 'The Joker and the Queen' Remix: Watch the Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 11, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2022.
 Rowley, Glenn (January 18, 2023). "The National Unveils 'First Two Pages of Frankenstein' Tracklist With Taylor Swift, Phoebe Bridgers & Sufjan Stevens". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 18, 2023. Retrieved January 18, 2023.
 Davis, Clayton (December 21, 2022). "Taylor Swift Doesn't Make Oscar Shortlist for All Too Well Short Film, but Advances for 'Carolina' Original Song". Variety. Archived from the original on December 24, 2022. Retrieved December 24, 2022.
 Utley, Riley (October 13, 2022). "Every Taylor Swift Movie Performance, Ranked". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on October 13, 2022. Retrieved October 14, 2022.
 Lang, Brent (December 9, 2022). "Taylor Swift Making Feature Directing Debut for Searchlight Pictures". Variety. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2022.
 Wood, Mikael; Brown, August (August 1, 2023). "It's a love story, L.A. just says yes: How Taylormania took over the world". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 1, 2023. Retrieved August 1, 2023.
 Mahdawi, Arwa (November 20, 2022). "Swifties know: the Ticketmaster fiasco shows America has a monopoly problem". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2022.
 Murray, Conor (December 8, 2023). "Taylor Swift's Eras Tour Is First In History To Gross Over $1 Billion, Report Says". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
 Tapp, Tom (December 8, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 'The Eras Tour' Grosses Over $1 Billion In 2023, The Biggest Haul For Any Act Ever". Deadline. Archived from the original on February 6, 2024. Retrieved February 10, 2024.
 Kaufman, Gil (November 28, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 'Eras Tour' Concert Movie Passes $250 Million in Worldwide Grosses". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 1, 2023. Retrieved December 1, 2023.
 Nordyke, Kimberly (January 7, 2024). "Golden Globes 2024 Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 8, 2024. Retrieved January 8, 2024.
 Adamczyk, Alicia; Abrams, Joseph (July 25, 2023). "The brilliant marketing synergy of Taylor Swift's Eras Tour and her rerecorded albums". Fortune. Archived from the original on August 21, 2023. Retrieved August 21, 2023.
 Ingham, Tim (June 14, 2023). "Reliving the Taylor Swift Catalog Sale Saga (And Following the Money...)". Music Business Worldwide. Archived from the original on June 14, 2023. Retrieved June 15, 2023.
 Blanchet, Brenton (November 20, 2023). "Travis Kelce Shares the Real Story of How Taylor Swift Romance Began in Wide-Ranging Interview". People. Archived from the original on November 20, 2023. Retrieved November 20, 2023.
 Kelly, Samantha Murphy (January 25, 2024). "Explicit, AI-generated Taylor Swift images spread quickly on social media". CNN Business. Archived from the original on January 25, 2024. Retrieved January 25, 2024.
 Phillips, Zoe G. (January 27, 2024). "SAG-AFTRA and White House Issue Statements on Taylor Swift AI Nudes: "We Have It in Our Power to Control These Technologies"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved January 27, 2024.
 "Taylor Swift Announces 'Brand New Album' 'The Tortured Poets Department' with 13th Grammy Win". Peoplemag. Archived from the original on February 10, 2024. Retrieved February 10, 2024.
 Cairns, Dan (March 5, 2009). "Swift rise of the anti-diva". The Australian. Archived from the original on December 24, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2012.
 Bream, Jon (December 7, 2007). "Music: OMG! Taylor's senior year". Star Tribune. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 Newman, Melinda (December 19, 2008). "Taylor Swift Sessions Interview". AOL. Archived from the original on October 9, 2012. Retrieved March 25, 2011.
 "Swift starts world tour in Asia, pushes "Speak Now' in NY". Country Standard Time. October 23, 2007. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 "News : 20 Questions With Taylor Swift". Country Music Television. November 12, 2007. Archived from the original on November 17, 2014. Retrieved April 18, 2012.
 McCafferty, Dennis (April 13, 2008). "Taylor's Swift rise". USA Weekend. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012.
 "Interview with Taylor Swift". Time. April 23, 2009. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift Style: Singer Won't Take Her Clothes Off, Wants People To Focus On Music". HuffPost. October 23, 2012. Archived from the original on January 4, 2015. Retrieved January 4, 2015.
 "InStyle meets country singing sensation Taylor Swift". InStyle UK. October 26, 2010. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2012.
 "Joni Mitchell: 15 Great Artists Influenced by the 'Blue' Singer". Rolling Stone. June 22, 2016. Archived from the original on December 26, 2021. Retrieved December 26, 2020.
 Jenkins, Sally (September 28, 2023). "You thought you knew the NFL. Now meet Taylor's Version". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved September 29, 2023.
 Bonaguro, Alison (November 8, 2012). "Offstage: Taylor Swift Inspired by Female Singer-Songwriters of the '90s". CMT. Archived from the original on October 4, 2023. Retrieved September 29, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift's Favorite Music". The Oprah Winfrey Show. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved October 23, 2012.
 Widdicombe, Lizzie (October 10, 2011). "You Belong With Me". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on July 24, 2014. Retrieved October 11, 2011.
 Mansfield, Brian (October 23, 2010). "Taylor Swift learns to 'Speak Now,' reveal her maturity". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 Block, Melissa (October 31, 2014). "'Anything That Connects': A Conversation With Taylor Swift". NPR Music. Archived from the original on February 6, 2015. Retrieved October 26, 2019.
 Eells, Josh (September 8, 2014). "The Reinvention of Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2016.
 Reid, Poppy (November 2, 2021). "The Curious Case of Keith Urban". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2021.
 Hiatt, Brian (June 18, 2019). "Taylor Swift: The Rolling Stone Interview". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2022.
 Weatherby, Taylor (March 10, 2021). "Taylor Swift's Road to Folklore". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on November 25, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2021.
 Franssen, Gaston (January 2, 2022). "Policing the celebrity of Taylor Swift: introduction". Celebrity Studies. 13 (1): 90–92. doi:10.1080/19392397.2022.2026148. S2CID 246997248.
 Savage, Mark (October 19, 2022). "Midnights: What we know about Taylor Swift's songwriting". BBC News. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 20, 2022.
 Bruner, Raisa (August 24, 2020). "Let's Break Down Taylor Swift's Tender New Album Folklore". Time. Archived from the original on July 31, 2020. Retrieved October 20, 2022.
 McNutt 2020, p. 77.
 Hughes 2017, p. 206; Perone 2017, p. 33.
 "Taylor Swift: Album Guide". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 5, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2012.
 "Pop and Rock Listings July 22 – 28". The New York Times. July 21, 2011. Archived from the original on January 28, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift Remade Fearless as Taylor's Version. Let's Discuss". The New York Times. April 9, 2021. Archived from the original on April 9, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021.
 Petridis, Alexis (March 6, 2009). "Taylor Swift: Fearless". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved August 13, 2022.
 Jones, Sasha-Frere (November 11, 2008). "Prodigy". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on October 21, 2016. Retrieved August 14, 2022.
 Hughes 2017, p. 206.
 Malec, Jim (May 2, 2011). "Taylor Swift: The Garden In The Machine". American Songwriter. p. 5. Archived from the original on November 20, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022.
 McNutt 2020, p. 78.
 Rosen, Jody (November 17, 2013). "Why Taylor Swift Is the Reigning Queen of Pop". Vulture. Archived from the original on November 19, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2020.
 McNutt 2020, p. 79.
 Levine, Nick (August 21, 2019). "Taylor Swift's Lover: The struggle to maintain superstardom". BBC. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2021.
 da Silva, Michelle (November 13, 2017). "Taylor Swift Has Changed for the Worse on Reputation". Now. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved July 27, 2020.
 Tucker, Ken (November 13, 2017). "Taylor Swift Pushes Further Into Electro-Pop With 'Reputation'". NPR. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved April 8, 2023.
 Moreland, Quinn (October 24, 2022). "Taylor Swift: Midnights". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on October 24, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2023.
 Ryan, Elise (October 21, 2022). "Review: Taylor Swift gets dark, electric on 'Midnights'". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on October 21, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2023.
 Winter, Velvet (November 12, 2022). "Like The Beatles, Madonna and Kylie Minogue before her, Taylor Swift is masterful at pivoting". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 13, 2022. Retrieved November 13, 2022.
 McNutt 2020, p. 79; Sloan 2021, p. 17.
 Sloan 2021, p. 17.
 Hyden, Steven (March 10, 2021). "Taylor Swift, Indie-rock star? Long, Long ago, this might have felt strange". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2021.
 Caramanica, Jon (July 26, 2020). "Taylor Swift, A Pop Star Done with Pop". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 10, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2022.
 Harbron, Lucy (November 11, 2021). "Why Taylor Swift's 'Red' Is Her Turning Point". Clash. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021.
 Gerber, Brady (July 27, 2020). "The Story Behind Every Song on Taylor Swift's folklore". Vulture. Retrieved December 12, 2023.
 Willman, Chris (October 21, 2022). "Taylor Swift's Midnights Marks a Return to Electronic, Confessional Pop That's Worth Losing Sleep Over: Album Review". Variety. Archived from the original on October 21, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2022.
 Fulford 2014, p. 192.
 "Taylor Swift Deepens Her Goth-Folk Vision on the Excellent 'Evermore'". Rolling Stone. December 11, 2020. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
 "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. January 1, 2023. Archived from the original on January 1, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2023.
 Provenzano 2018, p. 173.
 Roland, Tom (October 15, 2010). "Taylor Swift: The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 18, 2010. Retrieved July 3, 2012.
 Provenzano 2018, pp. 173–174.
 Provenzano 2018, p. 174.
 Powers, Ann (October 25, 2010). "Album review: Taylor Swift's Speak Now". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 28, 2010. Retrieved October 25, 2010.
 Willman, Chris (November 10, 2017). "Album Review: Taylor Swift's 'Reputation'". Variety. Retrieved April 8, 2023.
 Cox, Jamieson (November 13, 2017). "Taylor Swift: Reputation". Pitchfork. Retrieved April 8, 2023.
 Powers, Ann (November 10, 2017). "The Old Taylor's Not Dead". NPR. Retrieved April 8, 2023.
 Wilson, Carl (November 13, 2017). "On Reputation, the "Old Taylor" Is Dead, but the New One Isn't Quite Ready to Come to the Phone". Slate. Retrieved April 8, 2023.
 DeCaro, Alessandro (October 19, 2022). "10 best Taylor Swift scene covers". Alternative Press. Retrieved July 1, 2023.
 Barker, Andrew (November 27, 2020). "Folklore: The Long Pond Studio Sessions Review". Variety. Retrieved May 31, 2021.
 Lipshutz, Jason (March 18, 2023). "The 13 Best Moments From Taylor Swift's Eras Tour Kickoff". Billboard. Retrieved April 8, 2023.
 Kornhaber, Spencer (July 28, 2020). "Taylor Swift Is No Longer Living in the Present". The Atlantic. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
 Brehian, Tom (July 24, 2020). "Review: Taylor Swift's 'folklore' Is An Indie Record Unconcerned With Being Cool". Stereogum. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
 Willman, Chris (December 11, 2020). "Taylor Swift Has Her Second Great Album of 2020 With 'Evermore': Album Review". Variety. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
 Sodomsky, Sam (December 15, 2020). "Taylor Swift: evermore". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 15, 2020. Retrieved December 14, 2020.
 McCormick, Neil (April 9, 2021). "Taylor Swift copies her younger self – and she sounds even more Fearless today". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
 "Taylor Swift forges ahead with a dreamy throwback in Fearless (Taylor's Version)". The A.V. Club. April 9, 2021. Archived from the original on April 9, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
 Bernstein, Jonathan (April 9, 2021). "Taylor Swift Carefully Reimagines Her Past on 'Fearless: Taylor's Version'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
 Solomon, Kate (November 12, 2021). "Taylor Swift, Red (Taylor's Version), Review: How Brilliant She Is When Her Heart Is in Tatters". i. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved November 13, 2021.
 Snapes, Laura (August 23, 2020). "Taylor Swift: Folklore review – bombastic pop makes way for emotional acuity". The Guardian. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
 Snapes, Laura (November 12, 2021). "Taylor Swift: Red (Taylor's Version) Review – Getting Back Together with a Classic". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021.
 Kelly, Fred (October 21, 2022). "Taylor Swift's Midnights: what the critics are saying". The Week. Retrieved October 23, 2022.
 Petrusich, Amanda (June 12, 2023). "The Startling Intimacy of Taylor Swift's Eras Tour". The New Yorker. Retrieved June 12, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift's songwriting: how the star's music has changed, for better or worse". CBC Music. August 22, 2019. Retrieved November 10, 2021.
 Emily, Lee (November 5, 2021). "Here Are Taylor Swift's Best Bridges On 'Red' Ranked". iHeartRadio. Retrieved November 10, 2021.
 Eggertsen, Chris (September 20, 2022). "Taylor Swift's Iconic Songwriting Credits Amplified By Spotify With Dedicated Page". Billboard. Retrieved September 20, 2022.
 Bate, Jonathan (April 10, 2023). "Why Taylor Swift is a literary giant — by a Shakespeare professor". The Times. Retrieved April 10, 2023.
 Pazzanese, Christina (August 2, 2023). "So what exactly makes Taylor Swift so great?". Harvard Gazette. Retrieved August 7, 2023.
 Murphy, Sam (November 10, 2021). "How 'Red' Became The Most Pivotal Record In Taylor Swift's Career". Junkee. Retrieved November 10, 2021.
 Siroky, Mary (November 9, 2021). "Every Taylor Swift Album Ranked from Worst to Best". Consequence. Retrieved November 10, 2021.
 Bruner, Raisa (May 24, 2021). "How Olivia Rodrigo Become America's Biggest New Pop Star". Time. Retrieved November 10, 2021.
 Mulvey, John (September 16, 2023). "Arctic Monkeys, Taylor Swift, Kendrick Lamar, Lana Del Rey And The 30 Artists Who Will Shape The Next 30 Years". Mojo. Retrieved September 19, 2023.
 Farley, Christopher John (October 22, 2010). "Taylor Swift's Solo Act". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on February 1, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2012.
 Jo Sales, Nancy; Diehl, Jessica (April 2013). "Taylor Swift's Telltale Heart". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 30, 2017. Retrieved February 4, 2017.
 Daly, Rhian (December 13, 2020). "Taylor Swift says her diaristic songwriting style was 'unsustainable' for her future". NME. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
 Gallo, Phil (October 22, 2012). "Taylor Swift's Red: The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2013.
 Caramanica, Jon (October 20, 2010). "Taylor Swift Is Angry, Darn It". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved July 2, 2012.
 Kelly, James (August 26, 2009). "Taylor Swift writing her own songs and rules". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved July 30, 2012.
 Lansky, Sam (November 8, 2017). "Why Taylor Swift's Red Is Her Best Album". Billboard. Retrieved December 27, 2020.
 Hiatt, Brian (September 30, 2019). "9 Taylor Swift Moments That Didn't Fit in Our Cover Story". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019. Retrieved December 9, 2019.
 "Taylor Swift Talks Newfound 'Freedom,' 'Lover' Tour Plans and So Much More". On Air with Ryan Seacrest. August 27, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2020.
 Yuan, Jada (December 30, 2009). "Microwaving a tragedy: The marriage of romance and romanticism in '00s pop". Las Vegas Weekly. Archived from the original on December 21, 2013. Retrieved August 17, 2012.
 Rotman, Natalie (January 9, 2009). "Colbie Caillat has 'Breakthrough' with sophomore CD". Reading Eagle. Archived from the original on December 21, 2013. Retrieved August 17, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift's songwriting: how the star's music has changed, for better or worse". CBC News. Retrieved February 2, 2021.
 Knibbs, Kate (August 21, 2019). "Ten Years of Taylor Swift: How the Pop Star Went From Sweetheart to Snake (and Back Again?)". The Ringer. Retrieved December 13, 2021.
 Stubbs, Dan (October 9, 2015). "Taylor Swift: Power, Fame And The Future – The Full NME Cover Interview". NME. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
 Weber, Theon (November 3, 2010). "The Iceberg Songs of Taylor Swift". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved July 30, 2012.
 Beck, Julia (October 27, 2014). "Taylor Swift Is So Much More Fun Now That She's Jaded". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2021.
 Willman, Chris (October 10, 2010). "Princess Crossover". New York. Archived from the original on July 27, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 Rosen, Jody (November 13, 2008). "Fearless". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 Powers, Ann (October 30, 2014). "The Many New Voices of Taylor Swift". NPR. Retrieved June 2, 2022.
 Stoeffel, Kat (November 16, 2012). "Stop Asking Taylor Swift to Apologize for Writing Songs About Ex-Boyfriends – The Cut". New York. Archived from the original on November 27, 2012. Retrieved February 25, 2013.
 Raven, Robin (March 16, 2022). "10 Artists Who Have Stood Up For Women In Music: Taylor Swift, Lizzo & More". The Recording Academy.
 "Cover Preview: Taylor Swift Fights Back About Her Love Life, the Hyannis Port House—and Has Words for Tina Fey and Amy Poehler". Vanity Fair. March 5, 2013. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
 Dominus, Susan (November 16, 2012). "The Many Insecurities of Taylor Swift". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016.
 Doyle, Patrick (November 13, 2020). "Musicians on Musicians: Paul McCartney and Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved February 7, 2021.
 Olivier, Bobby (December 11, 2020). "Taylor Swift's 'Evermore' Is an Undeniable Folk-Pop Masterpiece". Spin. Retrieved February 1, 2021.
 Shutler, Ali (October 9, 2022). "Taylor Swift organises her lyrics into three 'dorky' pen-themed categories". NME. Retrieved October 18, 2022.
 Browne, Erin (October 21, 2022). "All of Taylor Swift's Famously Devastating Track 5's, Ranked". Vulture. Retrieved October 27, 2022.
 "NMPA to Honor Taylor Swift with Songwriter Icon Award Among Other 2021 Annual Meeting Honorees". National Music Publishers' Association. May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021.
 Linker, Damon (November 26, 2021). "Taylor Swift, Phoebe Bridgers, and Rihanna: How women took over songwriting". The Week. Retrieved November 28, 2021.
 Greco, Patti (November 13, 2017). "A Harvard Professor Critiques Taylor Swift's New Poems". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved December 21, 2021.
 Sheffield, Rob (October 13, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 'Eras Tour' Movie Will Make You Sing, Scream, and Sob". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
 Zacharek, Stephanie (December 14, 2023). "The Eras Tour Movie Is Irresistible No Matter How Much You Think You Like Taylor Swift". TIME. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
 "Ticketing Shmicketing: Taylor Swift's 'Eras Tour' Debut Slays (And Could Break All-Time Touring Record)". Pollstar. March 18, 2023. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023.
 Aramesh, Waiss David (March 18, 2023). "Taylor Swift's The Eras Tour Is a 3-Hour Career-Spanning Victory Lap". Rolling Stone. OCLC 1787396. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023.
 Gambles, Sarah (July 23, 2023). "The ubiquitous power of Taylor Swift". Deseret News. Retrieved July 23, 2023.
 McCormick, Neil (March 18, 2023). "Taylor Swift: The Eras Tour, review: a roaring spectacle of a comeback". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023.
 Kornhaber, Spencer (March 18, 2023). "What Made Taylor Swift's Concert Unbelievable". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 30, 2023.
 Foggatt, Tyler (June 3, 2023). "Look What Taylor Made Us Do". The New Yorker. Retrieved June 30, 2023.
 Seibert, Brian (August 9, 2023). "How to Command a Stage Without Great Dance Moves (Taylor's Version)". The New York Times. Retrieved August 11, 2023.
 Krelenstein, Greg (May 21, 2018). "TAYLOR SWIFT'S REPUTATION TOUR IS A POP TRIUMPH". V. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2018.
 Frere-Jones, Sasha (November 3, 2008). "Prodigy". The New Yorker. Retrieved June 30, 2023.
 Horton, Adrian (March 18, 2023). "Taylor Swift review – pop's hardest-working star gives Eras tour her all". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023.
 Kaplan, Ilana (March 18, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 'Eras' tour is a thrilling spectacle from a pop mastermind". i. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023.
 Young, Alex (March 27, 2023). "Taylor Swift's "The Eras Tour" Is a Triumph of Spectacle and Stamina: Review". Consequence. Retrieved June 30, 2023.
 Lipshutz, Jason (March 18, 2023). "The 13 Best Moments From Taylor Swift's Eras Tour Kickoff". Billboard. Retrieved July 1, 2023.
 O'Connor, Roisin (June 8, 2018). "Taylor Swift 'reputation' stadium tour review: Dazzling pop spectacle from the star who doesn't stand still". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved December 22, 2019.Savage, Mark (March 18, 2023). "Taylor Swift launches Eras tour with three-hour, 44-song set". BBC News. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Sisario, Ben (November 5, 2023). "How Taylor Swift's Eras Tour Conquered the World". The New York Times. Retrieved August 12, 2023. DeVille, Chris (July 12, 2018). "Big Reputation: A Trip To Taylor Swift's Hyper-Maximalist Stadium Tour". Stereogum. Retrieved June 30, 2023.
 Procell, Carlie; Padilla, Ramon (April 28, 2023). "Taylor Swift tour has many 'eras.' We tracked her movements to give you the look and feel". USA Today. Retrieved June 30, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift Shares Stunning 'Wildest Dreams' Performance from Grammy Museum". Billboard. January 5, 2016. Retrieved October 29, 2023.
 Burgham, Lydia (November 10, 2018). "Taylor Swift in Auckland, reviewed: Despite the snakes, her Reputation shines on". The Spinoff. Retrieved December 10, 2019.
 Dodd, Sophie (November 15, 2023). "All About Taylor Swift's Parents, Scott and Andrea Swift". People. Retrieved December 3, 2023.
 Swift, Taylor (March 15, 2013). ""Sparks Fly" (acoustic) Live on the RED Tour!" – via YouTube.
 Lewis, Randy (April 3, 2011). "Academy of Country Music Awards: Las Vegas welcomes Miranda Lambert, Taylor Swift with open arms". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 20, 2023.
 Ritchie, Mike (March 8, 2020). "Why Taylor Swift is making the ukulele cool again". The Herald. Retrieved July 1, 2023.
 Gensler, Andy (August 17, 2023). "The Showgoer: The Greatest Show On Earth — Taylor Swift's 'Eras Tour' — Is All That And Far More". Pollstar. Retrieved August 19, 2023.
 Sheffield, Rob (May 9, 2018). "Why Taylor Swift's 'Reputation' Tour Is Her Finest Yet". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 30, 2023.
 Willman, Chris (May 16, 2018). "Taylor Swift's 'Reputation' Tour Has Bad Blood, Good Will, Sex Appeal and Serpents". Variety. Retrieved December 22, 2019.
 Willman, Chris (March 18, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 'Eras' Show Is a Three-Hour, 44-Song Epic That Leaves 'Em Wanting More: Concert Review". Variety. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2018.
 Ordoña, Michael (September 9, 2022). "Taylor Swift wants an Oscar. So she took 'All Too Well' to TIFF". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 10, 2022.
 CMT.com Staff (May 4, 2011). "Taylor Swift's "Mean" Video Debuts Friday". CMT. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2019.
 Anitai, Tamar (August 27, 2010). "Video Premiere: Taylor Swift, 'Mine'". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 29, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2019.
 Bonaguro, Alison (May 6, 2011). "OFFSTAGE: Taylor Swift Isn't 'Mean' at All, Director Says". CMT News. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2019.
 Tailor, Leena (September 1, 2017). "Exclusive: Taylor Swift's Director Joseph Kahn on How Her Image Invokes a Double Standard: 'She's a Genius'". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019.
 O'Connell, Michael (October 9, 2015). "Taylor Swift and Jimmy Fallon Among Early Emmy Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019.
 Forbes, Jihan (May 14, 2015). "Peep Taylor Swift's Star-Studded Cast for Her 'Bad Blood' Music Video". The Fashion Spot. Retrieved May 13, 2020.
 "9 Things You Might Have Missed in Taylor Swift's Netflix Concert Film". E! News. December 31, 2018. Retrieved September 10, 2022.
 Spanos, Brittany (April 25, 2019). "Watch Taylor Swift, Brendon Urie's Colorful 'ME!' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019.
Moore, Sam (August 23, 2019). "Watch Taylor Swift's colourful new video for 'Lover'". NME. Archived from the original on August 27, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2019.
Zemler, Emily (June 17, 2019). "Watch Taylor Swift Reunite With Katy Perry in 'You Need to Calm Down' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 17, 2019. Retrieved June 17, 2019.
 Mylrea, Hannah (February 28, 2020). "Every incredible Easter Egg in Taylor Swift's 'The Man' video". NME. Retrieved March 9, 2020.
Spanos, Brittany; Legaspi, Althea (July 24, 2020). "Taylor Swift Blends Fantastical With Personal in 'Cardigan' Video". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 27, 2020.
"Justin Bieber & Megan Thee Stallion Lead 2021 MTV VMA Nominations". Billboard. Retrieved August 17, 2021.
 Weatherby, Taylor (February 5, 2023). "Taylor Swift Makes GRAMMY History (Again) With Best Music Video Win For "All Too Well: The Short Film"". Grammy Awards. Retrieved February 6, 2023.
 Lansky, Sam (December 6, 2023). "Taylor Swift Is TIME's 2023 Person of the Year". Time. Retrieved December 6, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
 Friedlander, Whitney (September 10, 2015). "Taylor Swift, Jimmy Fallon Among Juried Emmy Award Winners". Variety. Archived from the original on September 15, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
 "Taylor Swift dominates AMAs with 6 wins, extending lead as show's most-decorated artist". KTRK-TV. November 21, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022.
 Grein, Paul (November 19, 2023). "After the 2023 Billboard Music Awards, Who Is the All-Time Biggest Winner?". Billboard. Retrieved November 19, 2023.
 See Guinness World Records by Taylor Swift
 Lewis, Randy (November 4, 2013). "Taylor Swift to receive rare Pinnacle Award at CMA Awards Nov. 6". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 13, 2020.
 "Taylor Swift Nashville Tickets". Excite. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2015.
 Shelburne, Craig (October 18, 2010). "Taylor Swift Named NSAI's Songwriter-Artist of the Year". CMT. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2015.
 "Songwriters Hall of Fame". Songwriters Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2015.
 "The 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017.
 Polanco, Luis (April 5, 2016). "Taylor Swift to Receive First-Ever Taylor Swift Award From BMI". Billboard. Retrieved October 21, 2020.
 Jolly, Nathan (November 17, 2019). "Why Taylor Swift is to blame for latest twist in music rights drama". News.com.au. Retrieved November 17, 2019.
 "10 Life mantras by Taylor Swift to live by". India Today. December 13, 2016. Archived from the original on February 9, 2019. Retrieved July 16, 2020.
 Lipshutz, Jason (December 11, 2019). "Billboard Woman of the Decade Taylor Swift: 'I Do Want My Music to Live On'". Billboard. Retrieved December 11, 2019.
 "Taylor Swift to receive BRITs Global Icon award". Official Charts Company. May 9, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2021.
 "Taylor Swift to receive Global Icon Award!". Brit Awards. May 9, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2021.
 Paine, Andre (February 22, 2023). "Taylor Swift wins IFPI's 2022 Global Recording Artist Of The Year Award". Music Week. Retrieved February 22, 2023.
 Brandle, Lars (November 5, 2023). "Taylor Swift's '1989 (Taylor's Version)' Debuts at U.K. No. 1 With 'Massive' Sales". Billboard. Retrieved November 5, 2023.
 "Female artists with the most Irish Number 1 albums since 2000". Official Charts Company. November 5, 2020. Retrieved February 23, 2021.
 Wang, Dennis (April 16, 2021). "Taylor Swift's Fearless hits the right note in China, again". People's Daily. Retrieved June 26, 2021.
 Brandle, Lars (July 7, 2023). "Taylor Swift Sets Chart Record In Australia With Top-Five Sweep". Billboard. Retrieved February 13, 2024.
 Brandle, Lars (February 9, 2024). "Ahead of 'The Eras Tour' of Australia, Taylor Swift Sweeps Top 5". Billboard. Retrieved February 13, 2024.
 "Taylor beats Swift". Australian Recording Industry Association. July 14, 2023. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023.
 "Taylor sweeps the record". Australian Recording Industry Association. July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023.
 Cumulative touring gross:
"Top Touring Artist of the Pollstar Era" (PDF). Pollstar. June 10, 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 5, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2022.
Allen, Bob (September 26, 2023). "What A Friggin' Year! 2023 Boxoffice Results Remain At Record Highs". Pollstar. Retrieved October 18, 2023.
 Gensler, Andy (December 8, 2023). "Taylor Swift Sets All-Time Touring Record With $1 Billion Gross". Pollstar. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
 Willman, Chris (December 21, 2020). "Taylor Swift's 'Evermore' Sells a Million Worldwide in First Week". Variety. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2020.
 Paine, Andre (December 22, 2022). "Taylor Swift Achieves More Than 6 Million Global Units for Midnights and 37 Billion Total Streams in 2022". Music Week. Archived from the original on December 22, 2022. Retrieved July 19, 2023.
 Young, Alex (October 31, 2022). "Taylor Swift broke 73 records with release of new album Midnights". Consequence. Archived from the original on October 31, 2022. Retrieved July 19, 2023.
 Grein, Paul (November 8, 2023). "Taylor Swift Is Apple Music's 2023 Artist of the Year". Billboard. Retrieved November 8, 2023.
 Willman, Chris (October 28, 2023). "Taylor Swift Beats Her Own Spotify Record for Most Single-Day Streams for an Artist With '1989 (Taylor's Version)' Release". Variety. Archived from the original on October 29, 2023. Retrieved October 29, 2023.
 @billboardcharts (January 19, 2022). "Most entries on the #Global200 chart in a single week" (Tweet) – via Twitter.
 "Taylor Swift Chart History (Billboard Global 200)". Billboard. Retrieved July 17, 2023.
 "Greatest of All Time Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 14, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2019.
 Zellner, Xander (January 25, 2024). "Taylor Swift Tallies Record-Extending 95th Week at No. 1 on Artist 100 Chart". Billboard. Retrieved January 26, 2024.
 Caulfield, Keith (December 31, 2023). "Taylor Swift Surpasses Elvis Presley for Most Weeks at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Among Soloists". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2024.
 Trust, Gary (January 22, 2024). "Ariana Grande's 'Yes, And?' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved January 22, 2024.
 "Taylor Swift Chart History (Top Country Albums)". Billboard. Retrieved July 17, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift Chart History (Digital Song Sales)". Billboard. Retrieved January 14, 2021.
 Trust, Gary (July 28, 2023). "Taylor Swift Breaks Record for Most No. 1s on Pop Airplay Chart As 'Cruel Summer' Becomes Her 12th". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 29, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023.
 Caulfield, Keith (December 3, 2023). "Taylor Swift Makes History With Five of the Top 10 Albums on the Billboard 200". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2024.
 Caulfield, Keith (July 17, 2023). "Taylor Swift Has 11 Albums on the Billboard 200 Chart for the First Time". Billboard. Retrieved July 19, 2023.
 McIntyre, Hugh (January 22, 2024). "Taylor Swift Made Billboard History–Now Only She Can Match Her Own Feat". Forbes. Retrieved January 22, 2024.
 Caulfield, Keith (December 29, 2023). "Taylor Swift Has the Top Four on the Album Sales Chart for the First Time". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2024.
 Caulfield, Keith (January 3, 2024). "Taylor Swift Has 7 of the Top 10 on Billboard's Album Sales Chart". Billboard. Retrieved January 23, 2024.
 "RIAA – Top Artists (Digital Singles)". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved July 17, 2023.
 Ahlgrim, Callie (July 12, 2023). "There are 116 songs in history that have been certified diamond — here they all are". Insider Inc. Retrieved July 17, 2023.
 Caulfield, Keith (October 30, 2022). "Taylor Swift's Midnights Blasts in at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart With Biggest Week for an Album in 7 Years". Billboard. Retrieved October 30, 2022.
 Nicks, Stevie (April 29, 2010). "The 2010 Time 100: Taylor Swift". Time. Archived from the original on November 29, 2013. Retrieved April 22, 2012.
Vena, Jocelyn (April 16, 2015). "Taylor Swift, Kanye West, Kim Kardashian Make Time's 100 Most Influential People List". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 25, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2016.
Jensen, Erin (April 17, 2019). "Dwayne Johnson, Taylor Swift, Gayle King, more cover Time's 100 most influential people issue". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2019.
 Dockterman, Eliana (December 6, 2017). "'I Was Angry.' Taylor Swift on What Powered Her Sexual Assault Testimony". Time. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017.
 Shah, Simmone (December 6, 2023). "Taylor Swift Makes History as Person of the Year". Time. Retrieved December 6, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift Is TIME's 2023 Person of the Year". Time. December 6, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift". Forbes. Retrieved December 1, 2020.
 "30 Under 30 2017: All-Star Alumni". Forbes. Retrieved December 1, 2020.
 "#8 Taylor Swift". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 28, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2015.
 "Forbes Unveils Its 20th Annual Ranking Of The World's Most Powerful Women". Forbes. December 5, 2023. Retrieved December 5, 2023.
 Schneider, Marc (July 24, 2023). "8 Ways Taylor Swift Has Changed the Music Business". Billboard. Retrieved July 24, 2023.
 Khan, Fawzia (June 18, 2021). "The Might Of Taylor Swift". Elle. Archived from the original on June 28, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2021.
 Pattison, Kate (September 19, 2023). "How did Taylor Swift get so popular? She never goes out of style". The Conversation. Retrieved September 22, 2023.
 Grady, Constance (October 12, 2023). "The Eras concert movie is Taylor Swift leveling up". Vox. Retrieved October 13, 2023.
 Jericho, Greg (October 28, 2022). "Taylor Swift's incredible success in graphs – who can blame me for being a Swiftie as a 50-year-old man?". The Guardian. Retrieved October 29, 2022.
 Weatherhead, Shaina (April 20, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 'Miss Americana' Is Required Viewing Right Now". Collider. Retrieved April 24, 2023.
 Bartsch, Kayla (September 24, 2023). "Taylor Swift: Empress of the Zeitgeist". National Review. Retrieved September 24, 2023.
 "Taylor Swift: 'My Confidence Is Easy To Shake'". NPR. November 2, 2012. Retrieved May 20, 2021.
Thanki, Juli (September 24, 2015). "Taylor Swift: Teen idol to 'biggest pop artist in the world'". The Tennessean. Retrieved May 13, 2021.
Yahr, Emily (June 16, 2016). "Taylor Swift's first song came out 10 years ago. Here's what she was like as a teen songwriter". Arts and Entertainment. The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved May 13, 2021.
 El Mosselli, Sabrina (December 24, 2022). "How Taylor Swift rose from 'Miss Americana' to global megastar". Le Monde. Retrieved December 28, 2022.
 Cragg, Michael. "Is Taylor Swift our last remaining real popstar?". i-D. Archived from the original on May 6, 2023. Retrieved December 3, 2022.
 Seisdedos, Iker (December 27, 2022). "Pop music in the era of Taylor Swift: Behind the success of today's biggest star". El País. Retrieved December 28, 2022.
 Sanders, Sam (October 20, 2022). "Taylor Swift Is the Greatest Self-Portraitist of Our Time". Vulture. Retrieved October 21, 2022.
 "Taylor Swift's 40 Biggest Hot 100 Hits". Billboard. March 23, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2022.
 Leonard, Devin (November 12, 2014). "Taylor Swift Is the Music Industry". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved August 11, 2020.
 Zoladz, Lindsay (December 30, 2019). "What Were the 2010s?". New York. Retrieved November 22, 2020.
 Savaira, Augusta (November 23, 2022). "Welcome to 'Swiftonomics': What Taylor Swift reveals about the U.S. economy". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 23, 2022.
 Vincent, Alice (November 3, 2017). "Taylor Swift: the rise, fall and re-invention of America's sweetheart". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2020.
 Fischer & Seidman 2016, p. 529.
 Wahi, Sukriti (March 3, 2021). "Every Time Taylor Swift Perfectly Shut Down A Sexist Interview Question". Elle. Retrieved November 4, 2021.
 Davis, Allison P. (June 28, 2018). "The Taylor Swift Slut-Shaming Continues". The Cut. Retrieved November 4, 2021.
 Meddings, Jacqui (October 31, 2014). "Taylor Swift is our new cover goddess". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
 Chiu, Allyson (August 3, 2022). "Celebrities use private jets excessively. It's a climate nightmare". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved February 14, 2024.
 Mendez, Lola (February 14, 2024). "Taylor Swift claims she offsets her travel carbon footprint - how does that work?". BBC. Retrieved February 14, 2024.
 O'Malley, Isabella (February 2, 2024). "Why Taylor Swift's globe-trotting in private jets is getting scrutinized". Associated Press. Retrieved February 6, 2024.
 "Taylor Swift and Travis Kelce romance is bad for the planet. Couple burns a whopping $70,779 jet fuel in the last three months". The Economic Times. December 21, 2023. Retrieved February 6, 2024.
 Blistein, Jon (February 6, 2024). "Taylor Swift's Lawyers Threaten Private Jet Flight Tracker Over 'Stalking and Harassing Behavior'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 6, 2024.
 Matza, Max (February 7, 2024). "Taylor Swift threatens to sue student who tracks her private jet". BBC News. Retrieved February 7, 2024.
 Benitez-Eves, Tina (July 2, 2022). "Man Arrested for Harassing Taylor Swift, Attempting to Break Into Her New York City Apartment". American Songwriter. Retrieved June 10, 2023.
 Kreps, Daniel (July 2, 2022). "Brooklyn Man Arrested on Charges of Stalking Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 10, 2023.
 Della Cava, Marco; Ryan, Patrick (August 31, 2023). "Taylor Swift is 'in a class of her own right now,' as Eras tour gives way to Eras movie". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023.
 Crummy, Colin (March 13, 2014). "Detwanging country music: how Nashville took the UK". The Guardian. Retrieved September 23, 2021.
 Roland, Tom (July 7, 2016). "Love Story: The Impact of Taylor Swift's First Decade in Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 7, 2016.
 Tannembaum, Rob (September 12, 2014). "4 Ways Billboard Woman of the Year Taylor Swift Changed Country Music". Billboard. Retrieved December 31, 2019.
 O'Connor, Roisin (October 18, 2018). "Half of all new guitar players are women, finds study". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved October 20, 2020.
 Wang, Amy X. (May 22, 2018). "Guitars Are Getting More Popular. So Why Do We Think They're Dying?". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 20, 2020.
 "The 200 Most Important Artists of Pitchfork's First 25 Years". Pitchfork. October 4, 2021. Retrieved October 4, 2021.
 Lipshutz, Jason (December 16, 2021). "Billboard's Greatest Pop Stars of 2021: No. 1 — Taylor Swift". Billboard. Retrieved December 16, 2021.
 Catucci, Nick (August 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift Reaches For New Heights of Personal and Musical Liberation on 'Lover'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 18, 2021.
 Gormely, Ian (December 3, 2014). "Taylor Swift leads poptimism's rebirth". The Guardian. Retrieved August 2, 2021.
 Gambles, Sarah (July 23, 2023). "The ubiquitous power of Taylor Swift". Deseret News. Retrieved September 7, 2023.
 Friedman, Vanessa (April 24, 2023). "Taylor Swift and the Sparkling Trap of Constant Reinvention". The New York Times. Retrieved September 7, 2023.
 Rowley, Glenn (March 9, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 'All Too Well (10 Minute Version)' Is Now a Class at Stanford University". Billboard. Retrieved March 10, 2023.
 Ahlgrim, Callie (March 18, 2022). "How Taylor Swift inspired a new generation of singer-songwriters, in their own words". Business Insider. Retrieved March 18, 2022.
 Sutherland, Mark (December 13, 2019). "'I come with opinions about how we can better our industry': Taylor Swift". Music Week. Retrieved April 27, 2020.
Sisario, Ben (November 6, 2014). "Sales of Taylor Swift's '1989' Intensify Streaming Debate". The New York Times. Retrieved August 11, 2020.
Rosseinsky, Katie (October 29, 2021). "How Taylor Swift is changing the music industry a re-record at a time". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on April 9, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2021.
 Smith, Neil (June 22, 2015). "Five ways Taylor Swift is changing the world". BBC News. Retrieved December 31, 2019.
 Brooks, Dave (November 3, 2022). "How Taylor Swift Changed the Course of the Concert Ticketing Businesses". Billboard. Retrieved November 4, 2022.
 Sources on Swift and millennial era
 • McDuling, John (November 3, 2014). "Why Taylor Swift is the most important artist of the millennial era". Quartz. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2021.
 • "What Taylor Swift tells us about millennials". National Post. October 6, 2015. Retrieved October 30, 2021.
 • Kidd, Joel (March 2, 2020). "Taylor Swift Is the Surprising Face of Millennial Anxiety". The Walrus. Retrieved October 30, 2021.
 • Winograd, Morley; D. Hais, Michael (January 29, 2010). "Move over Kanye West, Taylor Swift and the Millennial generation are taking over music". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved October 30, 2021.
 • "The 17 Musicians Gen Z & Millennials Say Represent Their Generations". YPulse. October 8, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2021.
 • Nicolau, Elena (November 29, 2022). "How Taylor Swift is transforming millennial weddings". Today. Retrieved November 30, 2022.
 • "Taylor Swift is peak millennial vibes". NPR. October 21, 2022. Retrieved December 19, 2022.
 VanDerWerff, Emily (July 31, 2020). "Taylor Swift is the millennial Bruce Springsteen". Vox. Retrieved October 30, 2021.
 Ditum, Sarah (October 8, 2022). "Taylor Swift: the Bob Dylan of our age". The Times. Archived from the original on December 24, 2022. Retrieved October 9, 2022.
 "Taylor Swift Will Receive First-Ever Woman of the Decade Honor at Billboard's Women in Music". Billboard. November 18, 2019. Retrieved December 31, 2019.
 Elizabeth, De (November 24, 2019). "Taylor Swift Is Named Artist of the Decade at AMAs 2019". Teen Vogue. Retrieved December 31, 2019.
 Kemp, Sam (January 27, 2022). "The surprising Paul McCartney song inspired by Taylor Swift". Far Out. Retrieved July 5, 2023.
 Golsen, Tyler (May 14, 2023). "Mick Jagger discusses his performance with Taylor Swift". Far Out. Retrieved July 5, 2023.
 Brandle, Lars (January 28, 2015). "Taylor Swift on Madonna Praise: 'Now I'm Dead'". Billboard. Retrieved July 5, 2023.
 Aniftos, Rania (January 27, 2021). "Dolly Parton Says Taylor Swift Is 'Magnificent' Following Damon Albarn Feud: 'She Knows Who She Is'". Billboard. Retrieved July 5, 2023.
 Graff, Gary (October 31, 2021). "Taylor Swift Helps Induct Carole King, Sings "Will You Love Me Tomorrow" at Rock Hall Ceremony". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 20, 2022.
 Skinner, Tom (November 2, 2022). "Bruce Springsteen praises Taylor Swift's new album 'Midnights': "She's a tremendous writer"". NME. Retrieved July 5, 2023.
 Ruggieri, Melissa (November 3, 2021). "Billy Joel says Taylor Swift is like the Beatles of her generation: 'She knows music'". USA Today. Retrieved July 5, 2023.
 Williams, Joe (July 5, 2023). "Ringo Starr says Taylor Swift is "biggest star in the world"". Far Out. Retrieved July 5, 2023.
 Iasimone, Ashley (November 12, 2023). "Britney Spears Shares Throwback Photo With Taylor Swift From 20 Years Ago: 'Most Iconic Pop Woman of Our Generation'". Billboard. Retrieved November 12, 2023.
 Lutz, Ashley (October 8, 2022). "Taylor Swift's new album proves she is a business genius". Fortune. Retrieved October 8, 2022.
 Steele, Anne (July 1, 2023). "How to Succeed in Business Like Taylor Swift". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved July 2, 2023.
 Lynch, Joe (January 31, 2024). "Taylor Swift Tops Billboard's Annual Power 100 List for the First Time". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2024.
 Curto, Justin (December 22, 2020). "Did 2020 Kill the Long, Fancy Pop-Album Rollout for Good?". Vulture. Archived from the original on December 23, 2020. Retrieved December 27, 2020.
 Leight, Elias (July 23, 2020). "Taylor Swift Finally Abandoned the Traditional Album Rollout". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 15, 2022.
 Kheraj, Alim (November 9, 2022). "The curate's Easter egg: how Taylor Swift turned pop into a multiplayer puzzle". The Guardian. Retrieved November 9, 2022.
 Tannenbaum, Emily. "Taylor Swift Hid a Bunch of Easter Eggs in the All Too Well Short Film". Glamour. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
 Suskind, Alex (May 9, 2019). "New Reputation: Taylor Swift shares intel on TS7, fan theories, and her next era". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
 Yahr, Emily (December 26, 2022). "2022: The year in review (Taylor's version)". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 26, 2022.
 Stein, Jeannine (November 18, 2011). "Taylor Swift weighs in on being a role model". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012.
 Collins, Katie (June 8, 2018). "How Taylor Swift flipped online fandom on its head for the better". CNET. Retrieved March 19, 2023.
 King, Ashley (July 21, 2023). "Taylor Swift's 13 Management is Rarely Discussed, Changes Abound". Digital Music News. Retrieved September 23, 2023.
 Yotka, Steff (August 20, 2019). "Taylor Swift and Stella McCartney Reveal Their Lover Fashion Collaboration". Vogue. Retrieved October 20, 2020.
 Kaplan, Julee (January 29, 2009). "Taylor Swift Launches Sundress Line – Ready-to-Wear and Sportswear – Media". Women's Wear Daily. Archived from the original on July 29, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift to have greeting card line". USA Today. November 18, 2009. Archived from the original on December 14, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2012.
 Serpe, Gina (October 29, 2008). "Taylor Swift Gets All Dolled Up". E! News (Blog). Archived from the original on March 5, 2011. Retrieved September 20, 2010.
 Mychaskiw, Marianne (October 1, 2014). "Taylor Swift Is Launching Her Fourth Fragrance!". InStyle. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015.
 McIntyre, Hugh. "Taylor Swift Has Signed A Multi-Year Deal With AT&T". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2018.
 Chiu, Melody (July 26, 2019). "Watch Taylor Swift Hilariously Moonlight — and Fail — as a Bartender and Server in New Commercial". People. Retrieved May 7, 2022.
 "Taylor Swift: NHL's New Spokesperson". AOL. February 3, 2009. Archived from the original on February 7, 2009. Retrieved September 20, 2010.
 "Sony Electronics News and Information". Sony. April 26, 2010. Retrieved August 7, 2012.
 Lee, Ashley (October 27, 2014). "Taylor Swift Named New York City Welcome Ambassador". Billboard. Retrieved September 26, 2023.
 Kaufman, Gil (January 20, 2022). "Taylor Swift Tapped as First Record Store Day Global Ambassador". Billboard. Retrieved January 20, 2022.
 Snapes, Laura (August 24, 2019). "Taylor Swift: 'Pop music can feel like it's The Hunger Games, and like we're gladiators'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019.
 "The Original 300+ Time's Up Signatories". Time's Up. October 21, 2019. Archived from the original on May 3, 2020. Retrieved May 20, 2020.
 Mier, Tomás (June 24, 2022). "Taylor Swift Says She's 'Absolutely Terrified' After Roe v. Wade Decision". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 24, 2022.
 "Taylor Swift sends 'love' and 'respect' to LGBT fans". BBC News. June 4, 2018. Archived from the original on November 14, 2018. Retrieved December 15, 2018.
 Kreps, Daniel (June 1, 2019). "Taylor Swift Urges Senate to Pass Equality Act in Letter to Tennessee Senator". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 12, 2020.
 Lynch, Joe (June 26, 2020). "Taylor Swift Calls Out U.S. Census for Transgender Erasure". Billboard. Retrieved June 29, 2020.
 Lynch, Joe (June 14, 2019). "Taylor Swift Wishes NYC's Stonewall Inn 'Happy Pride' at Surprise Set". Billboard. Retrieved August 7, 2022.
 Aniftos, Rania (April 8, 2019). "Taylor Swift Donates $113,000 to Tennessee Equality Project to Fight Anti-LGBTQ Bills". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 9, 2019. Retrieved April 9, 2019.
 "Taylor Swift Makes a Generous Donation to GLAAD in Support of the LGBTQ Community" (Press release). GLAAD. June 1, 2019. Archived from the original on June 1, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 Lynch, John (March 23, 2018). "Taylor Swift Shares Support For Gun a Control Reform In Instagram Post". Business Insider. Retrieved May 20, 2020.
 Hiatt, Brian (September 18, 2019). "The Rolling Stone Interview Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019.
 Bailey, Alyssa (June 9, 2020). "Taylor Swift Tweeted About the Black Lives Matter Movement and Urged People to Vote". Elle. Retrieved July 27, 2020.
 Kreps, Daniel (June 12, 2020). "Taylor Swift Calls for Removal of Monuments That 'Celebrate Racist Historical Figures'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 12, 2020.
 France, Lisa Respers (June 19, 2020). "Taylor Swift got educated on Juneteenth and wants you to be, too". CNN. Retrieved July 27, 2020.
 Haag, Matthew (October 9, 2018). "Voter Registrations Spike as Deadlines Loom. Taylor Swift Had Something to Do With It". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018.
 Stevens, Matt (October 7, 2020). "Taylor Swift, leaning further into politics, endorses Joe Biden and Kamala Harris". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 7, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2020.
 Schuster, Steve (May 19, 2023). "Taylor Swift comes out against Trump, again". Wisconsin Law Journal. Retrieved November 4, 2023.
 Dellatto, Marisa (October 27, 2023). "Taylor Swift's New Era: The Pop Star Becomes A Billionaire". Forbes. Retrieved October 29, 2023.
 Pendleton, Devon; Ballentine, Claire; Patino, Marie; Whiteaker, Chloe; Li, Diana (October 26, 2023). "Taylor Swift Vaults Into Billionaire Ranks With Blockbuster Eras Tour". Bloomberg News. Retrieved October 26, 2023.
 Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 2, 2016). "The World's Highest-Paid Women in Music 2016". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 25, 2019. Retrieved July 13, 2019.
Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 6, 2019). "The World's Top-Earning Musicians Of 2019". Forbes. Retrieved July 29, 2022.
Voytko, Lisette (February 9, 2022). "The Highest-Paid Entertainers 2022". Forbes. Retrieved July 29, 2022.
Voytko, Lisette (February 13, 2023). "The World's 10 Highest-Paid Entertainers". Forbes. Retrieved July 29, 2022.
 "Highest annual earnings ever for a female pop star". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved November 15, 2017.
 Mercuri, Monica (July 10, 2019). "Taylor Swift Is The World's Highest-Paid Celebrity With $185 Million in 2019". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 12, 2019. Retrieved July 13, 2019.
Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (July 11, 2016). "Taylor Swift Is The World's Top-Earning Celebrity With $170 Million in 2016". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
 Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 23, 2019). "From Taylor Swift To Dr. Dre: The 10 Top-Earning Musicians Of The Decade". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 30, 2019. Retrieved December 31, 2019.
 Silva, Rachel; Tonelli, Lucia (October 3, 2023). "Inside Taylor Swift's 8 Incredible Homes". Elle Decoration. Retrieved October 12, 2023.
 Dailey, Hannah; Aniftos, Rania (December 21, 2023). "A Timeline of Taylor Swift's Generosity". Billboard. Retrieved December 24, 2023.
 Couch, Robbie (March 2, 2015). "Taylor Swift Named Most Charitable Celeb For Supporting Feminist Causes, Education, More". HuffPost. Archived from the original on October 21, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
 Pacella, Megan (June 13, 2012). "Taylor Swift Receives Star of Compassion Award". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved November 27, 2015.
 Cooper, Brittany Joy (March 27, 2012). "Taylor Swift to Receive 'Big' Honor From Michelle Obama at Kids' Choice Awards". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012.
 Lee, Ken (August 9, 2009). "Taylor Swift donates $100,000 to victims of Iowa Flood". People. Archived from the original on June 7, 2009. Retrieved September 9, 2009.
 "How Taylor Swift helps people worldwide". Borgen. February 2, 2023. Retrieved June 17, 2023.
 Moran, Jonathon (March 8, 2009). "Kylie to play at Sound Relief with Coldplay, Midnight Oil". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on October 10, 2016. Retrieved December 30, 2009.
 "Taylor Swift donates $500,000 after Nashville floods". BBC News. May 7, 2010. Retrieved May 7, 2022.
 Lewis, Randy (May 23, 2011). "Taylor Swift benefit concert raises more than $750,000 for tornado victims". Los Angeles Times (Blog). Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift gives $1m to help Louisiana flood relief efforts". The Guardian. August 17, 2016. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved August 17, 2016.
 Muhammad, Latifah (December 9, 2016). "Taylor Swift Donates $100,000 to Dolly Parton Fire Fund". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017. Retrieved January 11, 2017.
 Blair, Olivia (September 4, 2019). "Taylor Swift Makes 'Very Sizeable Donation' To A Food Bank in Houston After Hurricane Harvey". Elle. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019.
 Rowley, Glenn (April 13, 2023). "Taylor Swift Donated Enough to Feed 'Over 125,000' at Tampa Food Bank Ahead of The Eras Tour Stop". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 21, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2023.
 Dementri, Nikki (May 16, 2023). "'It's a blessing': South Philly pizza, cheesesteak shop thankful for T. Swift's business". CBS News. Archived from the original on May 17, 2023. Retrieved May 17, 2023.
 Grow, Kory (August 3, 2023). "Taylor Swift Is Helping Truck Drivers Buy First Homes With $100,000 Bonuses". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 3, 2023.
 Paulson, Dave (March 5, 2020). "Taylor Swift donates $1 million for Tennessee tornado relief". The Tennessean. Retrieved March 5, 2020.
 Ruggieri, Melissa. "Taylor Swift donates $1 million to help communities ravaged by Tennessee tornadoes". The Tennessean. Retrieved December 11, 2023.
 "Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame". Nashville Songwriters Foundation. Retrieved July 2, 2020.
 "Taylor Swift becomes namesake of Hendersonville High School auditorium". The Tennessean. September 23, 2010. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved May 29, 2011.
 McKinley, James C. (May 17, 2012). "Taylor Swift to Donate $4 Million to the Country Hall of Fame". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 Golden, Zara (October 1, 2012). "And The Taylor Swift VH1 Storytellers Contest Winner Is ... Harvey Mudd College!". VH1. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved April 21, 2014.
 "$100,000 Gift from Taylor Swift Provides Vital Support to Nashville Symphony". Nashville Symphony. December 16, 2013. Retrieved April 7, 2020.
 Sanz, Cynthia (December 14, 2009). "Taylor Swift Gives Big as She Turns 20 – Good Deeds, Taylor Swift". People. Archived from the original on June 17, 2012. Retrieved May 29, 2012.
Urban, Mike (October 14, 2011). "Taylor Swift donates 6,000 books to Reading Library". Reading Eagle. Archived from the original on May 12, 2012. Retrieved May 29, 2012.
Zhu, Danielle (November 17, 2015). "Taylor Swift partners with Scholastic to donate 25,000 books". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 14, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
 Cooper, Brittany Joy (February 2, 2012). "Taylor Swift Donates 14,000 Books to Nashville Public Library". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on June 17, 2012. Retrieved May 29, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift Helps With 'Delete Online Predators' Campaign". Country Weekly. September 18, 2007. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved November 29, 2015.
 "Taylor Swift Teams Up With UNICEF Tap Project Initiative". Taste of Country. March 17, 2011. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2012.
"Taylor Swift Among Participants in MusiCares Back To School Charity Auction". RTTNews. July 28, 2011. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2012.
 "Taylor Swift and ACM Lifting Lives present $50,000 donation to St. Jude". The Tennessean. June 13, 2011. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved May 29, 2012.
 "New and Hot Video: Taylor Swift Debuts 'Ronan' at Stand Up To Cancer Benefit". Rolling Stone. September 8, 2012. Archived from the original on September 13, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012.
 Knight, Joey (May 17, 2014). "Dick Vitale holds annual fundraiser for pediatric cancer". Tampa Bay Times. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 30, 2014.
 George, John. "Taylor Swift donates $50K to CHOP to help teens with cancer". The Business Journals (Blog). Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2014.
 Hardiman, Tim (April 20, 2007). "Taylor Swift Encourages Teen Volunteers". CMT. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
 Vagianos, Alanna (August 17, 2017). "This Is How Taylor Swift's Donations Will Impact Sexual Assault Survivors". HuffPost. Retrieved April 7, 2020.
 Peppin, Hayley (March 24, 2020). "Taylor Swift responded to the leaked 'Famous' phone call with Kanye West by urging fans to instead focus on coronavirus aid". Insider Inc. Retrieved May 13, 2020.
 Grow, Kory (April 1, 2020). "How Taylor Swift Is Helping a Small Nashville Record Store Survive". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 1, 2023.
 Hissong, Samantha (August 20, 2020). "Taylor Swift Starts Frenzy at Indie Record Stores With Surprise Signed 'Folklore' CDs". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 1, 2023.
 Havens, Lyndsey (April 18, 2020). "Taylor Swift Sings Heart-Rending 'Soon You'll Get Better' During 'One World' Concert". Billboard. Retrieved April 19, 2020.
 @RAINN (April 8, 2021). "In 2017, @taylorswift13 fearlessly shared her story of sexual assault in court. In honor of Sexual Assault Awareness & Prevention Month & #RAINNDay, Taylor Swift has made a generous gift to RAINN. Thank you for helping us ensure all survivors are believed and supported! https://t.co/oE7P1BVnNJ" (Tweet). Retrieved April 21, 2021 – via Twitter.
 "Taylor Swift's cash gift helps student take up degree". BBC News. August 20, 2020. Retrieved November 9, 2020.
 M Holloway, Sophie (December 14, 2023). "Taylor Swift and Selena Gomez among celebrities attending Gaza aid fundraiser". The Independent.
Cited literature
Fischer, Nancy; Seidman, Steven (2016). Introducing the New Sexuality Studies (3rd ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-44918-8. OCLC 953030187.
Fogarty, Mary; Arnold, Gina (2021). "Are You Ready for It? Re-Evaluating Taylor Swift". Contemporary Music Review. 40 (1): 1–10. doi:10.1080/07494467.2021.1976586.
Fulford, Phyllis (2014). An Idiots Guide: Singing Second Edition. Penguin Publishing. ISBN 978-1-61564-622-7.
Hughes, Charles (2017). "Country Music and the Recording Industry". In Stimeling, Travis D. (ed.). The Oxford Handbook of Country Music. Oxford University Press. pp. 205–228. ISBN 978-0-19-024817-8.
Jepson, Louisa (2013). Taylor Swift. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4711-3087-8.
McNutt, Myles (2020). "From 'Mine' to 'Ours': Gendered Hierarchies of Authorship and the Limits of Taylor Swift's Paratextual Feminism". Communication, Culture and Critique. 13 (1): 72–91. doi:10.1093/ccc/tcz042.
McGrath, John (2023). "The Return to Craft: Taylor Swift, Nostalgia, and Covid-19". Popular Music and Society. 46 (1): 70–84. doi:10.1080/03007766.2022.2156761.
Perone, James E. (2017). The Words and Music of Taylor Swift. The Praeger Singer-Songwriter Collection. ABC-Clio. ISBN 978-1-4408-5294-7.
Provenzano, Catherine (2018). "Auto-Tune, Labor, and the Pop-Music Voice". In Fink, Robert; Latour, Melinda; Wallmark, Zachary (eds.). The Relentless Pursuit of Tone: Timbre in Popular Music. Oxford University Press. pp. 159–182. ISBN 978-0-19-998522-7.
Sloan, Nate (2021). "Taylor Swift and the Work of Songwriting". Contemporary Music Review. Routledge. 40 (1): 11–26. doi:10.1080/07494467.2021.1945226. S2CID 237695045.
External links
Taylor Swift
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Data from Wikidata
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
Taylor Swift at AllMusic Edit this at Wikidata
Taylor Swift discography at Discogs Edit this at Wikidata
Taylor Swift at IMDb Edit this at Wikidata
Taylor Swift discography at MusicBrainz Edit this at Wikidata
vte
Taylor Swift
vte
Taylor Swift songs
Awards for Taylor Swift
vte
IFPI Global Year-End Charts
vte
Billboard Year-End number one albums
vte
Billboard Year-End Top Artist
Portals:
 Biography
icon Pop music
flag Pennsylvania
flag United States
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Taylor Swift1989 birthsLiving people21st-century American actresses21st-century American philanthropists21st-century American songwriters21st-century American women guitarists21st-century American women pianists21st-century American women singers21st-century women philanthropistsActresses from Nashville, TennesseeActresses from PennsylvaniaAmerican acoustic guitaristsAmerican billionairesAmerican country banjoistsAmerican country guitaristsAmerican country pianistsAmerican country record producersAmerican country singer-songwritersAmerican feministsAmerican film actressesAmerican folk guitaristsAmerican folk musiciansAmerican folk singersAmerican mezzo-sopranosAmerican multi-instrumentalistsAmerican music video directorsAmerican people of English descentAmerican people of German descentAmerican people of Italian descentAmerican people of Scottish descentAmerican pop guitaristsAmerican pop pianistsAmerican synth-pop musiciansAmerican television actressesAmerican voice actressesAmerican women country singersAmerican women guitaristsAmerican women philanthropistsAmerican women pop singersAmerican women record producersAmerican women rock singersAmerican women singer-songwritersAmerican women songwritersBig Machine Records artistsBrit Award winnersChristians from TennesseeCountry musicians from PennsylvaniaCountry musicians from TennesseeCountry pop musiciansFemale billionairesFemale music video directorsFeminist musiciansFilm directors from PennsylvaniaFilm directors from TennesseeGrammy Award winnersGuitarists from PennsylvaniaGuitarists from TennesseeMTV Europe Music Award winnersMTV Video Music Award winnersNME Awards winnersPeople from Bucks County, PennsylvaniaPhilanthropists from PennsylvaniaPhilanthropists from TennesseePrimetime Emmy Award winnersRCA Records artistsRecord producers from PennsylvaniaRecord producers from TennesseeRepublic Records artistsSinger-songwriters from PennsylvaniaSinger-songwriters from TennesseeSingers from Nashville, TennesseeSony Music Publishing artistsSynth-pop singersTime Person of the YearUniversal Music Group artistsBaldi family
This page was last edited on 16 February 2024, at 11:33 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

The	Odyssey	of	Homer
Translated	with	an	introduction	by
Richmond	Lattimore

	

To	Royal	Nemiah
Contents
Introduction
Book	I
Invocation	and	part	summary—
council	of	the	gods
—
Athene	visits	Telemachos
in	Ithaka	and	urges	him	to	go	in	search	of	his	father
—the	suitors	feast	in	the
house	of	Telemachos.
Book	II
Assembly	on	Ithaka—Telemachos	publicly	requests	the	suitors	to	go	home—
secret	departure	of	Telemachos	and	Athene.
Book	III
Athene	and	Telemachos	arrive	in	Pylos—
entertainment	by	Nestor	and	his	family
—
Telemachos	and	Peisistratos	leave	for	Sparta
.
Book	IV
Arrival	at	Sparta—
entertainment	by	Menelaos	and	Helen
—
the	wanderings	of
Menelaos
—
report	that	Odysseus	is	on	Kalypso's	island
—
at	Ithaka	the	suitors
learn	of	Telemachos'	departure	and	lay	an	ambush	for	him
.
Book	V
Council	of	the	gods—
Hermes	tells	Kalypso	to	let	Odysseus	go
—
he	sails	on	a
raft	but	is	wrecked	by	Poseidon
—
he	swims	ashore	on	Scheria
.
Book	VI
Odysseus	encounters	Nausikaa,	the	princess	of	the	Phaiakians,	and	is	accepted	as
a	guest.
Book	VII
Reception	of	Odysseus	by	Alkinoös	and	Arete
.
Book	VIII
Odysseus	at	the	games	of	the	Phaiakians
—
he	is	asked	to	tell	his	name	and	his
story
.
Book	IX
The	wanderings	of	Odysseus—the	raid	on	the	Kikonians—
the	Lotus-Eaters
—the
adventure	with	Polyphemos	the	Cyclops.
Book	X
The	wanderings	of	Odysseus—
Aiolos	and	the	bag	of	winds
—Odysseus	blown
back	to	sea	after	sighting	Ithaka—the	adventure	with	the	Laistrygones—
Circe's
island
—the	men	transformed	and	restored.
Book	XI
The	wanderings	of	Odysseus—
voyage	to	the	land	of	the	dead
—interviews
—
Elpenor
—Teiresias—Antikleia—the	heroines—
interlude	in	Scheria
—
interviews
—
the	heroes
—
return	to	Circe
.
Book	XII
The	wanderings	of	Odysseus—
the	Sirens—Skylla	and	Charybdis
—
the	cattle	of
Helios
—
loss	of	the	last	ship	and	all	the	companions
—Odysseus	rescued	by
Kalypso—end	of	his	story	to	the	Phaiakians.
Book	XIII
Return	of	Odysseus	to	Ithaka
—he	is	landed,	alone—strange	return	of	the
Phaiakian	ship—Athene	comes	to	Odysseus	and	advises	him.
Book	XIV
Odysseus	received	by	Eumaios
—
he	tells	Eumaios	the	(false)	story	of	his	life
.
Book	XV
Telemachos,	urged	by	Athene,	leaves	Sparta—from	Pylos,	he	sails	for	home—
Odysseus	still	with	Eumaios—
life	story	of	Eumaios
—
Telemachos	eludes	the
ambush	and	reaches	Ithaka
.
Book	XVI
Telemachos	visits	Eumaios
—
Odysseus	reveals	himself	to	Telemachos
—
Penelope	and	the	suitors	learn	that	Telemachos	has	returned—night	at	the	house
of	Eumaios.
Book	XVII
Return	of	Telemachos	to	his	house
—Odysseus,	disguised	as	a	beggar,	goes	to	the
house	with	Eumaios—
Odysseus	begs	from	the	suitors
.
Book	XVIII
Fight	between	Odysseus	and	Iros
—
Penelope	appears	briefly	before	the	suitors
—
after	disorderly	incidents	the	suitors	go	home
.
Book	XIX
Interview	by	night	between	Odysseus	and	Penelope
—Odysseus	almost	betrayed
by	his	scar—
the	story	of	the	scar
—
plan	for	the	test	of	the	bow
.
Book	XX
Next	morning	all	the	principals	gather	in	the	house.
Book	XXI
The	test	of	the	bow—
the	suitors	fail
—Odysseus	succeeds.
Book	XXII
The	killing	of	the	suitors
—
punishment	of	the	faithless	maids	and	thrall
.
Book	XXIII
Recognition	of	Odysseus	by	Penelope—
reunion
—Odysseus	goes	to	Laertes'
farm.
Book	XXIV
The	heroes	of	Troy	learn	the	story	from	the	ghosts	of	the	suitors—Odysseus
reveals	himself	to	Laertes—burial	of	the	suitors	by	their	relatives,	who	plan
revenge—
final	combat	between	Odysseus	and	his	party	and	the	relatives	of	the
suitors—peace	imposed	by	Athene
.
Glossary
About	the	Author
Praise
Credits
Copyright
About	the	Publisher
INTRODUCTION
THE	OUTLINE	OF	THE	ODYSSEY
The	Odyssey	as	we	have	it	is	an	epic	of	over	twelve	thousand	lines.	It	has	been
divided,	like	the	
Iliad
	and	probably	at	the	same	time,	into	twenty-four	books.
Book	number	and	line	number	are	the	standard	terms	of	reference.
The	contents	can	be,	very	broadly,	divided	as	follows:
The	Telemachy	or	Adventures	of	Telemachos,	i-iv
The	Homecoming	of	Odysseus,	v-viii	and	xiii.1-187
The	Great	Wanderings,	ix-xii
Odysseus	on	Ithaka,	xiii.187-xxiv.548.
We	can	also	distinguish	a	Proem,	Book	i.1-10,	and	an	End	of	the	
Odyssey
,	all	of
Book	xxiv.	This	division	is	for	convenience;	it	is	arbitrary	and	not	water-tight,
but	gives	us	terms	to	work	with.
1
	
I	begin	by	summarizing	the	bare	facts	of	the	story.	Odysseus	spent	ten	years
fighting	at	Troy,	and	another	ten	years	getting	home.	During	this	time,	none	of
his	family	knew	what	had	happened	to	him,	and	he	lost	all	his	ships,	all	his	men,
and	the	spoils	from	Troy.	After	ten	years,	or	in	the	tenth	year,	he	was	set	down	in
his	own	country,	alone	and	secretly,	though	with	a	new	set	of	possessions,	by	the
Phaiakians	of	Scheria,	who	were	the	last	people	he	visited	on	his	wanderings.
When	he	took	ship	for	Troy,	Odysseus	left	behind	his	wife,	Penelope,	and
his	infant	son,	Telemachos.	A	few	years	before	his	return,	the	young	bachelors	of
Odysseus’	kingdom,	Ithaka	and	the	surrounding	islands,	began	paying	court	to
Penelope	(ii.89-90).	She	was	accomplished	and	clever,	still	beautiful,	an	heiress
and	presumably	a	widow;	but	she	clung	to	the	hope	that	Odysseus	might	come
back,	and	held	them	off,	without	ever	saying	positively	that	she	would	never
marry	again.
The	suitors	made	themselves	at	home	as	uninvited	guests	in	the	palace	of
Odysseus.	Shortly	before	the	return	of	Odysseus,	Telemachos	visited	the
mainland	in	search	of	news	about	his	father.	He	heard	from	Menelaos	that
Odysseus	was	alive	but	detained	without	means	of	return	on	the	island	of
Kalypso	(iv.555-560).	Telemachos	returned	to	Ithaka.	The	suitors	set	an	ambush,
meaning	to	murder	him,	but	he	eluded	them	and	reached	Ithaka	just	after	his
father	arrived.
The	voyage	of	Telemachos,	the	arrival	of	Odysseus,	and	the	recognition	and
reunion	of	father	and	son,	were	all	supervised	by	Athene.
Father	and	son	plotted	the	destruction	of	the	suitors.	Odysseus	entered	his
own	house	unrecognized,	mingled	with	the	suitors	and	talked	with	Penelope.	He
and	Telemachos	contrived	to	catch	them	unarmed	and	with	the	help	of	two	loyal
serving	men	(and	of	course	Athene)	they	slaughtered	all	108	suitors.	Penelope
knew	nothing	of	the	plot;	Odysseus	revealed	himself	to	her	after	the	fighting	was
over.	The	relatives	of	the	dead	suitors	attacked	the	heroes	on	the	farm	of	Laertes,
father	of	Odysseus,	and	a	battle	began,	but	it	was	ended	by	Zeus	and	Athene,
who	patched	up	a	hasty	reconciliation.
THE	TELEMACHY
The	
Odyssey
,	like	the	
Iliad
,	begins	in	the	tenth	year	of	the	story's	chief
action,	with	events	nearing	their	climax	and	final	solution.	We	begin	with	a	very
rapid	location	of	Odysseus	in	place,	time,	and	stage	in	his	career,	but	then	(via
the	councils	of	the	gods	concerning	his	immediate	fate)	pass	to	Telemachos,	with
Athene's	visit	which	sends	him	off	on	his	journey.	It	is	only	after	Telemachos	has
begun	his	visit	in	Sparta,	and	heard	from	Menelaos	that	his	father	is	alive,	and
after	the	suitors	have	set	their	trap,	that	we	return	directly	to	Odysseus	himself.
We	then	follow	Odysseus	for	the	rest	of	the	
Odyssey
.	The	poet	now	tells	us	of
Odysseus'	journey	to	Scheria	and	his	sojourn	there;	and	he	makes	Odysseus
himself	recount	to	the	Phaiakians	his	previous	wanderings	(The	Great
Wanderings).	They	then	convey	him	to	Ithaka,	and	with	his	homecoming	the	tale
of	the	wanderings	of	Odysseus	joins	on	to	the	tale	of	Odysseus	on	Ithaka.
Thus	in	two	respects	the	narrative	order	of	the	poem	disagrees	with	the
chronological	order	of	the	story.	The	early	and	chief	wanderings	of	Odysseus	are
told	by	throwback	narrative	toward	the	middle	of	the	poem;	and	the	wanderings
of	Telemachos	come	first.
The	joins	or	transitions	from	theme	to	theme	are	noteworthy.	After	the	poet
has	located	Odysseus	in	time	and	space,	the	gods	consider	the	question.	Athene
urges	the	homecoming	of	Odysseus.	Zeus	proclaims	that	Athene	shall	have	her
way;	Odysseus	may	now	start	for	home.	Athene	answers	(i.81-95)
Son	of	Kronos,	our	father,	O	lordliest	of	the	mighty
,
if	in	truth	this	is	pleasing	to	the	blessed	immortals
,
that	Odysseus	of	the	many	designs	shall	return	home,	then
let	us	dispatch	Hermes,	the	guide,	the	slayer	of	Argos
,
to	the	island	of	Ogygia,	so	that	with	all	speed
he	may	announce	to	the	lovely-haired	nymph	our	absolute	purpose
,
the	homecoming	of	enduring	Odysseus,	that	he	shall	come	back
.
But	I	shall	make	my	way	to	Ithaka,	so	that	I	may	stir	up
his	son	a	little,	and	put	some	confidence	in	him
to	summon	into	assembly	the	flowing-haired	Achaians
,
and	make	a	statement	to	all	the	suitors,	who	now	forever
slaughter	his	crowding	sheep	and	lumbering	horn-curved	cattle
;
and	I	will	convey	him	into	Sparta	and	to	sandy	Pylos
to	ask	after	his	dear	father's	homecoming,	if	he	can	hear	something
,
and	so	that	among	people	he	may	win	a	good	reputation
.
This	excellently	motivates	the	Telemachy	but	it	does	perforce	leave	Odysseus
stranded,	and	after	the	major	part	of	the	Telemachy,	at	the	opening	of	Book	v,	the
return	to	Odysseus	shows	more	strain	than	the	departure	from	him	did.	Athene
has	been	to	Ithaka,	and	to	Pylos	with	Telemachos.	She	left	the	court	of	Nestor,
presumably	for	Olympos	(iii.371).	Now	she	has	to	start	all	over	again,	almost	as
if	the	case	of	Odysseus	had	never	come	up,	to	complain	of	his	sorrows;	but	ends
with	the	perils	of	Telemachos;	and	Zeus	seems	to	have	to	remind	her	that	she
herself	planned	everything	that	has	just	been	happening	(v.23).	Hermes,	who	has
been	waiting	for	this	for	four	books	and	five	days,	can	at	last	get	off	(i.84;	v.28)
and	the	wanderings	of	Odysseus	may	be	resumed.
The	obviousness	of	the	joins	and	the	bulk	of	material	not	specifically	related
to	Odysseus	in	Books	iii-iv,	his	absence	from	Books	i-ii,	have	suggested	that	the
Telemachy	was	an	independent	poem	which	was,	at	some	stage,	incorporated
more	or	less	whole	in	the	
Odyssey
.
2
	This	may	be	true,	and	there	is	no	way	to
prove	that	it	is	not	true.	But	it	is	also	possible	that	the	poet	(or	poets)
3
	of	the
Odyssey
,	in	the	form	in	which	we	have	it,	deliberately	developed	this	diversion,
never	meaning	to	take	up	Odysseus	until	he	had	first	established	Telemachos;
that	he	so	much	desired	to	do	this	that	he	was	willing	to	accept	the	necessary
awkwardnesses	of	narrative	joining	in	which	it	would	involve	him.
Why	so?	Let	us	consider	the	effects	gained	for	the	total	poem	from	having
the	Telemachy	with	its	present	contents	in	its	present	place.
Odysseus	in	the	
Iliad
	was	a	great	man,	but	his	magnitude	is	increased	by	the
flattering	mentions	of	him	by	Nestor	(iii.120-123),	Menelaos	(iv.333-346),	and
Athene	herself	(i.255-256	with	265-266).	It	is	increased	still	more	by	the	evident
need	for	him	felt	by	his	family	and	friends,	concisely	stated	by	Athene	(i.253-
254):	“How	great	your	need	is	now	of	the	absent	Odysseus,”	and	everywhere
apparent.
Through	Nestor	and	Menelaos,	also,	the	
Odyssey
	is	secured	in	its	place
among	the	
Nostoi
,
4
	the	homecomings	of	the	Achaians.	The	general	character	of
the	
Nostoi
	is	succinctly	stated	by	Nestor	(iii.130-135)
But	after	we	had	sacked	the	sheer	citadel	of	Priam
,
and	were	going	away	in	our	ships,	and	the	god	scattered	the
Achaians
,
then	Zeus	in	his	mind	devised	a	sorry	homecoming
for	the	Argives,	since	not	all	were	considerate	and	righteous
;
therefore	many	of	them	found	a	bad	way	home,	because	of
the	ruinous	anger	of	the	Gray-eyed	One,	whose	father	is	mighty
.
The	sufferings	of	two	great	heroes,	by	long	wandering	away	from	home
(Menelaos)	and	by	treachery	and	disaster	on	arrival	(Agamemnon),	both	well
point	up	the	case	of	Odysseus	in	two	of	its	different	aspects.	For	an	audience
well	versed	in	the	tale	of	Troy,	or	the	
Iliad
,	interest	is	added	in	a	second	viewing
of	some	old	favorites:	Nestor,	Helen,	Menelaos,	all	very	like	themselves	in	the
Iliad
.	Without	planning	some	such	excursus	as	the	Telemachy,	the	poet	could	not
have	worked	them	in	without	a	great	deal	more	awkwardness	than	it	has,	in	fact,
cost	him.
Another	point	gained	through	the	Telemachy	is	the	instigation	to	murder.
For	Odysseus	must	end	by	murdering	Penelope's	suitors.	So,	it	appears,	the
story	demanded.	Further,	the	story	demanded,	or	the	poet	firmly	intended,	that
Telemachos	should	assist	his	father	in	this	business.	The	suitors	are	a	bad	lot	and
they	have	put	themselves	in	the	wrong,	but	we	cannot	assume	that	Homer's
audience	was	so	inured	to	bloodshed	that	they	could	take	this	altogether	lightly
(modern	readers	mostly	cannot).	In	any	case,	there	are	numerous	passages	in	the
Telemachy	which	look	as	if	they	might	be	designed,	which	do	in	any	case	serve,
to	shore	up	the	consciences	of	the	avenging	heroes	and	of	their	sympathizers	in
the	story	or	in	the	audience.
Aigisthos	seduced	Agamemnon's	wife	while	he	was	gone	at	Troy	and
murdered	him	on	his	return.	Orestes	murdered	his	father's	murderer.	The	case
may	not	seem	quite	parallel	to	the	situation	of	the	
Odyssey
,	but	Agamemnon's
ghost	used	his	story	as	a	warning	against	the	wife's-suitor	danger	(xi.441-446;
454-456);	and	when	Athene	tells	Odysseus	about	Penelope	and	her	suitors	he
immediately	thinks	of	Agamemnon	(xiii.383-385).	Orestes'	act	seems	to	be	taken
as	a	precedent	justifying	murder	when	it	means	putting	one's	house	in	order.	It	is
mentioned	with	approval	by	Zeus	(i.35-43),	and	Athene	specifically	holds	up
Orestes	as	an	example	to	Telemachos	(i.298-300).	Nestor	tells	Telemachos	of
Orestes'	revenge,	and	immediately	warns	Telemachos	not	to	stay	too	long	away
from	home—once	again,	as	if	there	were	a	specific	connection	(iii.306-316).
It	is	not	only	through	her	praise	of	Orestes	that	Athene	shows,	at	the	very
outset	of	the	
Odyssey
,	that	she	favors,	one	might	even	say	insists	on,	the
slaughter	of	the	suitors.	She	definitely	tells	Telemachos	to	do	it	(i.294-296).	And
in	order	that	they	may	be	the	more	guilty,	she	has	apparently	put	the	plot	of
ambushing	Telemachos	into	their	minds,	while	at	the	same	time	making	sure	that
it	must	fail	(v.23-24).	The	whole	later	action	of	the	
Odyssey
	is	approved,
authorized,	encouraged	by	Athene.
She	is	carefully	established	in	this	role	at	the	outset	of	the	epic	as	we	have	it.
This,	I	believe,	is	the	chief	reason	why	we	start	with	the	Telemachy.	Here	she
can	be	cast	as	the	fairy	godmother,	or	guardian	spirit.	If	the	poet	had	begun	at	the
beginning	of	the	wanderings	of	Odysseus,	he	could	not	have	cast	her	in	this	role,
because	the	tradition	was	that	at	this	time	Athene	was	angry	with	all	the
Achaians,	including	even	Odysseus.	So,	for	instance,	Phemios	sang	of	(i.326-
327)
the	Achaians'	bitter	homecoming
from	Troy,	which	Pallas	Athene	had	inflicted	upon	them
.
Nestor	agrees,	adding	the	wrath	of	Zeus	(iii.130-135	quoted	above).
The	wrath	of	Athene	deserves	special	consideration,	and	I	shall	return	to	it
when	I	discuss	the	wanderings	of	Odysseus.	Here	it	may	be	sufficient	to	say	that
the	poet	has	established	the	position	of	Athene,	as	guardian	spirit	of	the	family,
by	beginning	with	the	Telemachy.
Last	of	all,	and	most	obvious	of	all,	the	Telemachy	gives	us	Telemachos.
Once	Odysseus	is	on	the	scene,	our	attention	is	mainly	fixed	on	him,	but	his
young	helper	quietly	maintains	the	character	that	has	been	built	up	for	him,
without	strain	or	hurry,	in	the	first	four	books.
I	think,	then,	that	it	can	be	said,	as	objectively	as	is	possible	in	such	cases,
that	the	
Odyssey
	gains	much	from	its	Telemachy.	The	cost	is	the	delay	in
bringing	us,	first-hand,	to	Odysseus	and	his	wanderings.	But	did	Homer	count
such	delay	as	cost?
In	the	
Odyssey
,	the	poet	gives	us	a	few	indications	of	his	views	about
storytelling.	One	should	not	be	repetitive,	xii.450-453:
Why	tell	the	rest	of
this	story	again,	since	yesterday	in	your	house	I	told	it
to	you	and	your	majestic	wife?	It	is	hateful	to	me
to	tell	a	story	over	again,	when	it	has	been	well	told
.
And	well	has	Odysseus	(Homer,	that	is)	told	his	story.	Thus	Alkinoös,	xi.366-
368:
You	have
a	grace	upon	your	words,	and	there	is	sound	sense	within	them
,
and	expertly,	as	a	singer	would	do,	you	have	told	the	story
.
It	is	storytelling	they	like,	and	they	are	not	impatient,	xi.372-376:
Here	is
a	night	that	is	very	long,	it	is	endless.	It	is	not	time	yet
to	sleep	in	the	palace.	But	go	on	telling	your	wonderful	story
.
I	myself	could	hold	out	until	the	bright	dawn,	if	only
you	could	bear	to	tell	me,	here	in	the	palace,	of	your	sufferings
.
“If	you	could	only	hear	him,”	says	Eumaios	to	Penelope.	“I	had	him	for	three
nights,	and	he	enchanted	me”	(xvii.512-521).
Delay,	excursus,	elaboration—whether	by	creative	expansion	or
incorporation	of	by-material—is	part	of	the	technique	of	the	epic,	as	opposed	to
chronicle.	In	the	
Iliad
,	the	wrath	of	Achilleus	is	not	hastened	to	its	fulfillment;
nor,	in	the	
Odyssey
,	the	vengeance	of	Odysseus.	Consider	the	daydream	of
Telemachos,	how	he	visualizes	his	father's	homecoming,	i.115-116:
imagining	in	his	mind	his	great	father,	how	he	might	come	back
and	all	throughout	the	house	might	cause	the	suitors	to	scatter
.
All	he	has	to	do	is	appear,	armed,	and	the	suitors	will	scatter	in	panic.	So	too
Athene,	i.255-256;	265-266:
I	wish	he	could	come	now	to	stand	in	the	outer	doorway
of	his	house,	wearing	a	helmet	and	carrying	shield	and	two
spears
….
I	wish	that	such	an	Odysseus	would	come	now	among	the	suitors
.
They	all	would	find	death	was	quick,	and	marriage	a	painful
matter
.
5
Over	too	quickly,	a	tableau,	not	a	story.	How	different	is	the	actual	return	and
slow-plotted	slaying,	directed	by	Athene	herself.	Delaying	matter,	if	worthy,
was,	I	think,	welcome.
THE	WANDERINGS	OF	ODYSSEUS
The	wanderings	themselves	can	be	considered	under	four	headings,	as
follows.
a
.	
The	Wanderings	as	part	of	the	
Nostoi
,	or	general	homecoming	of
the	Achaians.
b
.	
The	Great	Wanderings,	from	Troy	to	Kalypso's	isle,	recounted	to
the	Phaiakians	by	Odysseus	himself,	Books	ix-xii.
c
.	
The	Homecoming,	from	Kalypso's	isle	to	Ithaka,	including	the
stay	with	the	Phaiakians.	This	is	told	by	the	poet	as	narrator,	not
by	Odysseus,	and	occupies	Books	v-viii,	and	xiii.1-187,	being
interrupted	by	Odysseus'	account	of	the	Great	Wanderings.
d
.	
The	lying	stories	told	by	Odysseus	when	he	is	disguised	as	a
tramp	pretending	to	be	a	fallen	noble;	together	with	some
information	which	Odysseus	as	tramp	claims	to	have	heard
about	the	true	Odysseus.
a.	The	Wanderings	of	Odysseus	are	placed	among	the	general	homecomings,
or	
Nostoi
	(the	subject	of	a	later	epic)	at	the	very	outset,	i.11-14:
Then	all	the	others,	as	many	as	fled	sheer	destruction
,
were	at	home	now,	having	escaped	the	sea	and	the	fighting
.
This	one	alone,	longing	for	his	wife	and	his	homecoming
,
was	detained	by	the	queenly	nymph	Kalypso,	bright	among
goddesses
.
Elsewhere	in	the	first	four	books	we	have	scattered	allusions	to	the
homecomings.	They	are	generally	characterized	by	Nestor's	speech,	iii.130-135:
But	after	we	had	sacked	the	sheer	citadel	of	Priam
,
and	were	going	away	in	our	ships,	and	the	god	scattered	the
Achaians
,
then	Zeus	in	his	mind	devised	a	sorry	homecoming
for	the	Argives,	since	not	all	were	considerate	nor	righteous
;
therefore	many	of	them	found	a	bad	way	home,	because	of
the	ruinous	anger	of	the	Gray-eyed	One,	whose	father	is	mighty
.
We	are	told	of	the	murder	of	Agamemnon,	the	wreck	and	drowning	of	Aias
Oïleus,	the	storm	battering	and	wanderings	of	Menelaos.	Yet	there	is	sometimes
an	odd	note	of	inconsistency.	Nestor	reports	that	he	and	Diomedes	came	home
without	mishap,	and	that	he	has	heard	that	Neoptolemos,	Philoktetes,	and
Idomeneus	did	the	same.
6
	Proteus	tells	Menelaos	that	only	two	chiefs	perished	in
the	homecoming	(iv.496-497).	This	does	not	square	very	well	with	the	“sorry
homecoming”	spoken	of	by	Nestor	and	mentioned	elsewhere,	nor	does	Nestor's
account	of	the	departure	of	Odysseus	agree	well	with	Odysseus'	own	account.
7
	It
is	possible	that	there	was	an	early	variant	version	of	the	
Nostoi
.
b.	and	c.	The	Great	Wanderings,	starting	from	Troy,	take	Odysseus	to	the
Kikonians,	the	Lotus-Eaters,	the	Cyclopes,	Aiolos,	the	Laistrygones,	Circe's	isle,
the	Land	of	the	Dead,	the	Sirens,	Skylla	and	Charybdis,	Thrinakia,	and	Kalypso's
isle.	From	the	Kikonians	he	is	driven	south,	off	the	map,	and	his	last	certainly
identifiable	landmark	is	Kythera	(ix.81).	After	that,	except	for	a	brief	sight	of
Ithaka	(x.28-55),	he	wanders	among	marvels,	and	though	his	seas	and	landfalls
have	often	been	identified,	all	is	hypothetical	and	nothing	is	secure.
Through	these	adventures,	partly	perhaps	because	Odysseus	is	telling	them
in	his	own	person,	the	major	gods	appear	very	little.	Athene	does	not	appear	at
all.	Responsibility	for	the	troubled	wanderings	is	pinned	on	Poseidon	through	the
prayer	of	Polyphemos,	his	son,	after	his	blinding	(ix.528-536).
Here,	as	we	have	noted,	the	order	in	the	epic	narrative	does	not	follow	the
chronological	order.	The	invocation	and	the	opening	scene,	before	leading	to	the
Telemachy,	establishes	Poseidon	as	the	persecutor	of	Odysseus,	i.68-79	(Zeus
speaking):
It	is	the	earth	encircler	Poseidon	who,	ever	relentless
,
nurses	a	grudge	because	of	the	Cyclops,	whose	eye	he	blinded
;
for	Polyphemos	like	a	god,	whose	power	is	greatest
over	all	the	Cyclopes.	Thoösa,	a	nymph,	was	his	mother
,
and	she	is	daughter	of	Phorkys,	lord	of	the	barren	salt	water
,
who	in	the	hollows	of	the	caves	had	lain	with	Poseidon
.
For	his	sake	Poseidon,	shaker	of	the	earth,	although	he	does	not
kill	Odysseus,	yet	drives	him	back	from	the	land	of	his	fathers
.
But	come,	let	all	of	us	who	are	here	work	out	his	homecoming
,
and	see	to	it	that	he	returns.	Poseidon	shall	put	away
his	anger;	for	all	alone	and	against	the	will	of	the	other
immortal	gods	united	he	can	accomplish	nothing
.
Poseidon	is	Odysseus'	persecutor,	just	as	Athene	is	firmly	established	as	his
protector	(i.48-62).
The	Telemachy	follows,	and	then	the	Homecoming,	which	as	we	have	seen
starts	with	Athene	taking	up	the	case	of	Odysseus.	She	helps	him	against
Poseidon,	who	wrecks	his	raft	and	who	proposes	to	take	a	final	revenge	on	the
Phaiakians	for	conveying	him	home.	It	looks	like	contrivance;	at	least,	the	result
is	to	mitigate	any	tradition	that	the	sufferings	of	Odysseus	and	the	other
Achaians	were	due	to	the	wrath	of	Athene.
The	hallmark	of	the	wanderings,	from	Troy	to	home,	is	imaginative
combination.
Except	for	the	very	beginning,	known	places	do	not	figure;	nor	traditional
characters,	except	in	the	Land	of	the	Dead.	The	gods	of	Olympos,	I	have	said,
are	not	prominent.	Rather,	we	see	much	of	minor	divinities,	ill-attested	outside
of	the	
Odyssey
	itself,	such	as	Circe	and	Kalypso.	We	find	monsters	like	Skylla
and	Charybdis,	and	the	delightful	but	almost	equally	monstrous	Sirens.	We	have
mortals	who	are	almost	superhuman	in	one	dimension	or	another.	The	Lotus-
Eaters	offer	magic	fruit	(ix.92-97).	The	Phaiakians	have	their	magic	ships
(viii.555-563),	they	may	even	have	automatons	(vii.91-94;	100-102),
8
	their
orchards	bear	fruit	forever	in	season	and	out	(vii.114-126),	and	the	gods,	who
live	near	them,	visit	them	openly	without	disguise	(vii.201-206).	The
Laistrygones	have	supernatural	strength	and	ferocity	(x.116-124),	and	the	normal
seasons	do	not	seem	to	apply	in	their	country.
Consider	also	Aiolos.	He	lives	a	blissful	life	in	a	brazen	tower	with	his	six
sons	married	to	his	six	daughters	(x.1-2)	and,	in	flat	contradiction	to	epic
tradition	elsewhere,	he,	a	mortal,	has	been	put	by	Zeus	in	charge	of	all	the	winds,
whom	he	keeps	tied	up	in	a	bag.
So,	too,	the	Cyclopes	of	the	
Odyssey
	are	quite	different	from	the	Cyclopes	in
Hesiod	and	elsewhere.	Elsewhere	they	are	gods;	in	the	
Odyssey
	they	are	mortals.
Elsewhere	there	are	three	of	them,	and	their	names	are	Brontes,	Steropes,	and
Arges;	in	the	
Odyssey
	they	are	apparently	numerous,	and	one	of	them	is	named
Polyphemos;	this	Polyphemos	is	the	son	of	Poseidon,	but	elsewhere	the
Cyclopes	are	the	sons	of	Ouranos	and	Gaia.	Elsewhere	they	are	smiths	and
builders,	but	in	the	
Odyssey
	they	are	herdsmen,	or	at	least	Polyphemos	is.	Their
chief	and	perhaps	sole	similarity	is	the	single	eye,	and	the	name	of	Cyclops.
9
Now	Cyclops	(Kyklops)	means	not	“one-eyed”	but	“round-eyed.”	Thus
Hesiod,	not	content	with	the	name,	describes	them	as	being	not	merely	round-
eyed	but	one-eyed,	
Theogony
	142-145:
These	in	all	the	rest	of	their	shape	were	made	like	gods
,
but	they	had	only	one	eye	set	in	the	middle	of	their	foreheads
.
Kyklopes,	Wheel-eyed,	was	the	name	given	them,	by	reason
of	the	single	wheel-shaped	eye	that	was	set	in	their	foreheads
.
Homer,	on	the	other	hand,	while	describing	their	nature	and	way	of	life,	never
tells	us	that	they	are	one-eyed,	but	seems	rather	to	assume	that	Polyphemos	is
one-eyed,	or	rather	that	we	know	he	is.	This	comes	up	when	Odysseus	proposes
to	blind	him,	ix.331-333:
Next	I	told	the	rest	of	the	men	to	cast	lots,	to	find	out
which	of	them	must	endure	with	me	to	take	up	the	great	beam
and	spin	it	in	Cyclops'	eye	when	sweet	sleep	had	come	over	him
.
The	blinding	scene	which	follows	assumes	throughout	that	there	is	only	one	eye
to	deal	with.
This	suggests	to	me	that	Homer	“borrowed”	the	name	and	the	notion	of
Cyclops	for	his	story	and	that	the	name	Cyclops	by	now	“meant,”	that	is	implied,
a	one-eyed	giant.	The	story	itself	may	have	been	a	previous	folk	tale,	since	it	has
many	analogies;
10
	or	it	may	have	been	free	invention.	Be	that	as	it	may,	the	story
of	the	blinding	of	Polyphemos	the	Cyclops	as	we	have	it	brings	Poseidon	into
the	story.	His	prayer	to	his	father	(ix.526-536)	causes	the	troubled	wanderings	of
Odysseus,	as	we	were	told	at	the	start	(i.68-75)	and	elsewhere.	But	Odysseus	at
the	time	of	the	blinding	was	
already
	lost	from	home;	his	wanderings	were	begun
before	they	were	caused.
The	paradox	seems	most	plausibly	explained	as	a	compromise.	Homer	knew
and	admitted	the	wrath	of	Athene	(and	Zeus	and	other	gods)
11
	which	caused
suffering	to	the	Achaians,	including	Odysseus.	But	he	alters	it	as	far	as	he	can	to
a	situation	where	Athene	merely	acquiesces	in	the	sufferings	of	Odysseus	out	of
respect	for	Poseidon,	whose	wrath	is	thus	emphasized.
On	Ithaka,	Odysseus	gently	complains	to	Athene	that,	while	he	enjoyed	her
patronage	at	Troy	and	among	the	Phaiakians,	he	did	miss	her	company	in
between,	that	is,	on	the	Great	Wanderings	(xiii.314-323).	She	ultimately	answers
this,	xiii.339-343:
And	I	never	did	have	any	doubt,	but	in	my	heart	always
knew	how	you	would	come	home,	having	lost	all	of	your
companions
.
But,	you	see,	I	did	not	want	to	fight	with	my	father's
brother,	Poseidon,	who	was	holding	a	grudge	against	you
in	his	heart,	and	because	you	blinded	his	dear	son,	hated	you
.
Perhaps	this	will	stand	as	Athene's	official	version.
d.	In	addition	to	the	authentic	wanderings	of	Odysseus	recounted	by	the	hero
himself	or	by	the	poet,	there	are	five	false	stories	told	by	the	hero	about	himself.
These	are	addressed	respectively	to	Athene	(xiii.256-286),	Eumaios	(xiv.191-
359),	the	suitors	(xvii.419-444),	Penelope	(xix.	165-202),	and	Laertes	(xxiv.302-
308).	All	the	stories	serve	as	answers	to	the	standard	question,	spoken	or
unspoken,	raised	by	the	presence	of	a	stranger	(especially	on	an	island):	“Who
are	you	and	where	do	you	come	from?”	All	the	stories	involve	known	and
identifiable	places.	They	are	meant	to	be	plausible,	and	the	supernatural	and	the
marvelous	elements	of	the	wanderings	find	no	place	here.
The	longest	and	fullest	account	is	the	second,	given	to	Eumaios.	Here
Odysseus	represents	himself	as	a	Cretan,	a	veteran	of	the	Trojan	War,	who
subsequently	led	a	disastrous	raid	on	Egypt,	was	spared	and	befriended	by	the
Egyptian	King,	survived	the	wreck	of	a	Phoenician	ship,	and	came	to	Ithaka	by
way	of	Thesprotia.	The	first,	third,	and	fourth	accounts	vary	or	repeat	these
themes.	All	the	first	four	necessarily	represent	Odysseus	as	a	former	nobleman
down	on	his	luck.	By	the	time	he	talks	to	Laertes,	however,	he	has	recovered	his
property	and	status,	and	the	story	of	the	fallen	noble	is	no	longer	necessary.	He	is
from	Alybas,	wherever	that	may	be,	and	has	arrived	from	Sikania,	presumably
Sicily.
The	story	of	the	raid	on	Egypt	has	attracted	special	attention.	It	reads	like	an
account	of	one	of	the	great	raids	by	the	Peoples	of	the	Sea,	attested	in	the	annals
of	Egypt,	but	told	here	from	the	invaders'	point	of	view.
12
	This	would	tie	the
Homeric	poems	to	history,	and	suggest	that	the	tradition	of	troubled
homecomings	for	the	Achaians	might	have	originated	in	actual	turbulence	and
wanderings	after	the	Trojan	War.
The	presence	of	these	stories	in	the	final	version	of	the	
Odyssey
	could
perhaps	be	accounted	for	by	the	poet's	desire	to	exploit	and	develop	the	talents	of
his	hero,	giving	content	to	the	general	comment,	xix.203:
He	knew	how	to	say	many	false	things	that	were	like	true	sayings
.
But	it	is	also	possible	that	the	lying	stories,	taken	together,	might	represent	a
fragmentary	outline	of	an	original	
Odyssey
,	in	which	the	wanderings	were
confined	to	known	places	in	the	Mediterranean:	Crete,	Cyprus,	Egypt,	Phoenicia,
Thesprotia;	and	which	the	present	
Odyssey
	has	replaced.	One	could	thus	make
up	a	rough	and	imperfect	series	of	analogies,	such	as,	for	instance:
	
Raid	on	Egypt
Great	Wanderings
Egyptian	counterattack
Laistrygones
King	of	Egypt
Circe	or	Kalypso
Phoenician	wreck
Wreck	of	Odysseus'	last	ship	or	of	the	raft
Thesprotia
Scheria,	the	land	of	the	Phaiakians:
	
Nothing	like	this	can,	of	course,	be	pressed,	but	the	lying	stories	in	themselves
emphasize	the	element	of	imagination	in	the	
Odyssey
	as	we	have	it.	By	contrast
to	the	Great	Wanderings,	the	lying	stories	link	rather	to	the	
Nostoi
.
THE	WORLD	OF	THE	WANDERINGS
The	world	of	the	Wanderings	has	occasioned	even	more	controversy.	Briefly,
there	are	two	extreme	views.	On	the	one,	the	places	in	the	Wanderings,	such	as
the	land	of	the	Lotus-Eaters,	Circe's	Isle,	Scheria,	and	so	forth,	represent	real
places	in	the	Mediterranean,	or	even	out	of	it;	or	at	least	some	of	them	do.	On
the	other	view,	they	are	imaginary.	Both	these	views	seem	indeed	to	be	extreme,
but	it	is	difficult	to	find	a	middle	ground.
Many	identifications	have	been	made,	and	the	whole	subject	is	too	large	and
complicated	to	treat	in	detail.
13
	It	may	be	useful	to	look	at	a	few	favorite
identifications.	The	Lotus-Eaters	are	regularly	located	on	the	coast	of	Libya
(Africa),	because	of	the	sailing	log,	though	Homer,	who	knows	of	Libya,	does
not	use	the	name	here.	There	is	a	strong	tradition	that	places	Polyphemos	and	the
Cyclopes	in	Sicily.	Skylla	and	Charybdis	have	often,	despite	many	objections,
been	located	in	the	Straits	of	Messina.	Korkyra	(now	often	called	Corfu)	claimed
to	be	Scheria,	the	land	of	the	Phaiakians.
Some	of	these	traditions	are	early.	Thucydides,	writing	at	the	end	of	the	fifth
century	
B.C
.,	refers	to	legends	about	Cyclopes,	and	also	Laistrygones,	in	Sicily,
and	to	the	Korkyraians'	pride	in	the	ancient	sea	fame	of	the	Phaiakians.
14
	Also,
the	traditions	have	survived,	or	have	been	resuscitated,	and	to	this	day	near
Acireale	the	Sicilians	will	show	you	the	rocks	Polyphemos	threw	at	the	ship	of
Odysseus,
15
	while	at	Corfu	your	guide	will	point	out	the	little	island	which	is	the
Phaiakian	ship	turned	to	stone,	and	the	bay	where	Odysseus	encountered
Nausikaa.
16
Yet	there	are	serious	difficulties.	Nothing	in	the	text	of	the	
Odyssey
	indicates
that	the	Cyclopes	lived	in	Sicily	or,	in	fact,	on	an	island	at	all.	Phaiakian	Scheria
does	seem	to	be	an	island,	far	out	in	the	sea	with	no	land	near.	Corfu	is	an	island,
but	lies	so	close	off	the	mainland	that	from	the	open	sea,	whence	Odysseus
approached	it,	and	even	from	some	places	on	the	landward	side,	it	is	impossible
to	tell	where	the	mainland	ends	and	the	island	begins,	or	even	that	Corfu	is	an
island	at	all.	Yet	as	Odysseus	first	sees	it	(v.281)
it	looked	like	a	shield	lying	on	the	misty	face	of	the	water
.
External	evidence	raises	still	greater	difficulties.	The	
Odyssey
	substantially
as	we	have	it	could	not	have	been	completed	much	before	the	end	of	the	eighth
century	
B.C
.	The	traditional	foundation	dates	for	many	Greek	cities	in	the	West
are	earlier	than	that.	Sicilian	Naxos	is	said	to	have	been	settled	in	735	
B.C
.,
Syracuse	and	Korkyra	in	734,	and	half	a	dozen	others	before	700;	Kyme
(Cumae),	near	Naples,	claims	even	greater	age.	These	dates	are	generally
accepted	by	modern	scholars,	and	the	pottery	in	some	places	even	goes	back	to
Mycenaean	times.
17
	Thus,	by	the	time	of	the	
Odyssey's
	completion,	the	western
Mediterranean	as	far	as	Sicily	was	not	only	well	explored,	but	pretty	well	settled
with	Greek	colonies,	colonies	almost	or	quite	as	Hellenic	as	their	mother	cities	in
old	Greece.	How	could	such	a	place	belong	simultaneously	to	the	known	world
and	the	wonder	world	of	the	Wanderings?	How	could	Korkyra	be	both	itself	and
Scheria?	Only,	one	might	say,	by	embedding	features	conceived	very	early	in	the
process	of	accumulation,	and	ignoring	later	phases.
This	does	not	seem	to	be	the	normal	process.	Homer's	Ithaka	is	Ithaka,	not	a
wonderland.	Sicily	as	Sikania	is	mentioned	as	if	it	were	a	real	place	(xxiv.307);
the	land	of	the	Sikels	(presumably	Sicilians)	is	a	source	or	market	for	slaves,	not
Cyclopes	or	other	monsters	(xx.383;	xxiv.211;	365;	389).	Menelaos	speaks	of
Libya	among	other	far	but	real	places,	iv.83-85:
I	wandered	to	Cyprus	and	Phoenicia,	to	the	Egyptians
,
I	reached	the	Aithiopians,	Eremboi,	Sidonians,
and	Libya
.
The	place	is	preternaturally	prosperous,	but	it	keeps	company	with	Cyprus,
Phoenicia,	Egypt,	and	Ethiopia,	not	with	the	Lotus-Eaters,	and	a	relatively
workaday	Phoenician	ship	was	carrying	Odysseus	there	to	be	sold	as	a	slave
(xiv.295-297).
Those	who	would	find	true	points	of	reference	for	Aiolos,	the	Phaiakians,
Laistrygones,	and	the	rest	frequently	offer	the	support	of	topographical	detail
from	the	Homeric	text.	Sometimes	this	is	too	general	for	identification,	but	often
it	is	plausible.	The	little	island	off	the	land	of	the	Cyclopes	is	described	in
thoughtful	detail,	as	if	seen	by	the	eye	of	a	prospective	settler	(ix.116-169);	but
where	is	it?	The	land	of	the	Laistrygones	is	vividly	presented;	we	can	still	ask
the	same	question.	In	these	and	other	cases,	the	descriptions	may	well	be	based
on	authentic	reports	from	mariners.
But	they	also	may	be	put	in	the	wrong	place.	That	is,	to	say	it	another	way,
for	this	is	important,	it	is	possible	to	combine	topographical	accuracy	with
geographical	incoherence.
This	seems	actually	to	have	happened	in	the	case	of	Ithaka.	Topographical
details	are	scattered	through	the	poem.	The	scholar	can	review	these	and
honestly	say	that	Homer	seems	to	know	his	Ithaka,	and	what	it	is	like.
18
	Only	he
does	not	seem	to	know	where	it	is.	Listen	to	Odysseus	himself,	who	
ought
	to
know,	ix.21-26:
I	am	at	home	in	sunny	Ithaka.	There	is	a	mountain
there	that	stands	tall,	leaf-trembling	Neritos,	and	there	are	islands
settled	around	it,	lying	one	very	close	to	another
.
There	is	Doulichion	and	Same,	wooded	Zakynthos
,
but	my	island	lies	low	and	away,	last	of	all	on	the	water
toward	the	dark,	with	the	rest	below	facing	east	and	sunshine
.
This	simply	will	not	do	for	Ithaka	(Thiaki),	though	that	has	the	landmarks,	for	it
lies	tucked	close	in	against	the	
eastern
	side	of	the	far	larger	Kephallenia
(Same?).	Homer's	description	would	in	fact	better	suit	Corfu	(Korkyra),	which
all	the	world	has	already	identified	with	Phaiakian	Scheria.
I	am	thus	forced	back	to	the	belief	that	the	places	of	the	Wanderings	are
combinations.	They	are	made	by	the	imagination.	They	are	in	part	sheer	fancy;
and	sailors'	stories	can	involve	monsters	and	enchanted	places,	as	well	as
authentic	report.	But	they	probably	contain	bits	and	pieces	of	solid	unassimilated
fact.	The	lands	of	the	Wanderings	seem	to	stand	on	the	same	footing	as	their
inhabitants.	These	too	are	of	this	world	and	stature,	rather	than	that	of	Olympos
and	the	Olympians.	Yet	they	are	not	quite	of	this	world	either.	They	are	people
endowed	like	no	people	we	shall	ever	meet,	and	live	in	places	where	no	one,
since	Odysseus,	will	ever	go.
19
	And	thus	the	Land	of	the	Dead,	where	Odyssesus
and	his	men	(so	soon	to	die)	are	the	only	living	visitors,	takes	its	natural	place
among	the	Wanderings.	For	it	is	described	not	as	an	underworld	but	as	a	far
shore,	with	landmarks	borrowed	(perhaps)	from	some	or	several	true	places	in
the	real	world.
If	the	
Odyssey
	is	a	work	of	the	imagination,	then,	we	must	ask,	are	the
Wanderings	symbolic	or	allegorical?	Do	they	represent	the	story	not	of	a	man
but	of	Man?	Many	have	thought	so.
20
	I	think	not.	But	the	Wanderings	do	lend
themselves	to	a	morality,	for	it	is	easy	to	read	the	adventures	as	a	series	of	trials.
The	Greek	authors	liked	to	dramatize	the	test	(
peira
)	by	which	a	person
established	his	quality.	Odysseus	passes	or	at	least	survives	the	trials	by	terror
and	force:	the	Kikonians,	the	Cyclops,	the	Laistrygones,	the	confrontation	with
the	ghosts,	Skylla,	Charybdis,	Zeus'	storm,	Poseidon's	storm.	And	there	is	trial
by	temptation.	His	men	fail	disastrously	against	curiosity	and	hunger	with	the
Bag	of	Winds	and	the	Cattle	of	the	Sun,	but	Odysseus	endures,	and	he	endures
also	against	the	temptations	to	stay	with	comfort	and	beauty	and	give	up	the	hard
voyage	home:	the	charms	of	the	Lotus-Eaters,	Circe,	the	Sirens,	Kalypso,
Nausikaa.
But	symbolism	and	allegory	seem	foreign	to	the	biology	of	early	Greek	epic;
it	is	hard	for	me	to	think	that	the	moral	proposition	came	first,	with	the	story
shaped	to	present	it.	Even	in	the	case	of	Circe	turning	the	men	to	swine,	it	is
probably	mistaken	to	read	anything	more	meaningful	than	a	fairy-tale
transformation.	There	is	plenty	of	morality	in	the	
Odyssey
,	but	it	is	where	it
ought	to	be,	inextricably	implicit	in	the	story	itself.	This	is	a	brilliant	series	of
adventures	linked	and	fused	by	character.	The	tests	(including	the	tests	on
Ithaka)	are	passed	by	the	exercise	of	virtues,	
viz.
	(in	ascending	order)	physical
courage	and	strength;	ingenuity	where	these	might	fail;	restraint,	patience,	tact,
and	self-control;	and	the	
will
	for	home.
These	are	the	virtues	not	of	Man,	but	of	a	particular	valiant,	resourceful,
much-enduring	hero,	established	as	such	in	the	
Iliad
,	and	developed	in	a
development	of	the	
Nostoi
,	the	sequel	to	the	
Iliad
.
ODYSSEUS	ON	ITHAKA
In	the	middle	of	a	line,	xiii.187,	we	leave	the	Phaiakians	forever,	without
even	learning	what	finally	happened	to	them,	and	henceforth	we	are	concerned
almost	exclusively	with	Odysseus	on	Ithaka.	He	will	not	attack	the	suitors	until
Book	xxii,	and	he	will	not	reveal	himself	to	Penelope	until	Book	xxiii.	Thus	the
length	allotted	to	Odysseus	on	Ithaka	is	extraordinary.	Nearly	nine	books,	more
than	twice	the	text	given	to	the	Great	Wanderings,	are	devoted	to	the	time	from
Odysseus'	arrival	to	his	dropping	of	disguise	and	attack	on	the	suitors,	and	for
nearly	nine	books	very	little	happens.
We	can	only	guess	at	the	purpose	of	this	drawing-out.	We	may	observe	some
of	the	effects.	The	revelations	and	recognitions,	by	Telemachos,	Eumaios	and
Philoitios,	Penelope,	Laertes,	are	strung	out	bit	by	bit.	We	are	teased	by	the
abortive	recognitions	by	Argos	and	Eurykleia,	and	by	the	times	when	the	careful
hero	nearly	gives	himself	and	the	game	away	(xviii.90-94;	xx.28-30).	There	is
the	constant	threat	that	Penelope	will,	at	the	very	last	moment,	give	in	to	the
suitors	(xix.	524-534;	576-581;	xxi.	68-79).	There	arises	that	special	irony	where
the	audience	or	reader,	in	on	the	whole	secret,	can	watch	the	victims	being	gulled
by	the	hero,	his	merciless	guarding	divinity,	and	his	equally	merciless	son.
The	story	of	near-recognition	is	beautifully	played	out	in	the	interview
between	the	hero	and	his	wife,	where	she	confides	in	the	stranger	to	whom	she	is
so	drawn	that	she	can	hardly	let	him	go	(xix.509).	Here	and	elsewhere,	the
leisurely	composition,	in	which	talk	is	overwhelmingly	predominant,	gives
opportunity	to	elaborate	the	characters.	The	epithets	of	the	three	leading	persons
—resourceful	Odysseus,	thoughtful	Telemachos,	and	circumspect	Penelope—
gain	depth	and	intensity	through	these	slow	books.	Penelope,	in	particular,	is
done	with	great	subtlety.	Desperately	pressed,	with	no	power	but	her	wits,
charm,	and	heart,	she	plays	a	waiting	game	and	never	commits	herself.
The	leading	suitors,	Antinoös,	Eurymachos,	and	Amphinomos,	also	gain
some	dimension.	Both	as	a	group	and	as	individuals,	in	a	few	cases,	the	suitors
could	have	been	much	simpler	than	they	are.	For	the	poet	seems	mostly	to	have
seen	the	moral	issue	as	just	right	against	wrong.
21
	The	sin	of	the	faithless	maids
and	of	the	one	faithless	thrall	is	disloyalty.	The	sin	of	the	suitors	is	perhaps	this,
too,	but	they	also	abuse	hospitality.	To	Homer,	perhaps	because	he	was	a
wandering	poet,	this	virtue	is	thematic,	and	again	and	again	we	are	given	object
lessons	on	the	right	dealings	between	host	and	guest,	through	the	conduct	of
Telemachos,	Nestor	and	his	family,	Menelaos	and	a	reformed	Helen,	the
Phaiakians,	Odysseus,	Kalypso,	Penelope.	Horrid	counter-examples	are
furnished	by	Polyphemos	and	the	Laistrygones.	The	suitors	are	aware	of	the
principle	(xvii.481-487)	but	in	action	they	are	a	living	travesty	of	all	proper
custom.	Thus	they	lose	all	divine	favor.	Not	even	an	Olympian	god	is	so
prejudiced	as	to	take	their	part.
Yet	they	are	no	indiscriminate	group	of	villains,	nor	are	they	all	villains.
They	are	said	to	be	plotting	the	murder	of	Telemachos	but,	once	he	has	slipped
past	them,	they	seem	irresolute	about	it	(xvi.371-406).	They	appear	to	be	more
an	intolerable	nuisance	than	an	actual	menace.	They	have	some	moral	notions
and	some	sense	of	decency	(xvi.400-406;	xvii.	365-368;	481-487).	While
indirectly	offending	the	gods	by	their	treatment	of	people,	they	respect	the	gods
and	regularly	observe	the	forms	of	religion.	This,	and	their	occasional
kindnesses,	do	them	no	good	(xvii.	363-364).	Odysseus	tries	to	warn	the	best	of
them,	but	Athene	has	no	mercy	(xviii.124-157).
Their	doom	seems	excessive	to	me.	I	do	not	know	how	it	seemed	to	Homer.
But	Penelope	cried	over	her	pet	geese	(xix.535-558),	and	Homer	may	have
conceived	some	liking	for	his	own	creatures,	and	put	off,	as	long	as	he	could,
their	necessary	slaughter.
THE	END	OF	THE	ODYSSEY
After	the	killing	of	the	suitors	and	the	reunion	of	Penelope	and	Odysseus,	the
end	of	the	
Odyssey
	reads	like	a	hurried	composition.	The	purpose	of	the	second
visit	to	the	dead	is	not	altogether	clear.	It	does,	however,	in	some	sense	dispose
of	the	suitors,	whose	bodies	were	for	some	time	lying	about	the	palace	(they	are
finally	buried,	xxiv.417);	and	it	does	link	the	Ithakan	episode	with	the
background	of	the	Trojan	War,	in	a	manner	not	uncongenial	to	the	poet	of	the
eleventh	book,	if	this	is	he.
On	the	other	hand,	the	previous	narrative	demands	a	reunion	with	Laertes,
and	it	certainly	demands	some	kind	of	patch-up	of	the	chaotic	situation	in	Ithaka,
where	“all	the	best	young	men”	(i.245)	are	lying	dead.	A	reconciliation	is
scrambled	together	by	a	hasty	and	inadequate	
deus	ex	machina
,	which	ends	the
epic.	The	hand	has	lost	its	firmness,
22
	but	who	can	say	for	sure	that	the	hand	is
not	Homer's?
THE	ODYSSEY	AND	THE	ILIAD
This	brings	us	to	the	question	of	unity,	which	cannot	be	solved	but	must	be
faced.	For	the	
Odyssey
,	as	previously	for	the	
Iliad
,	I	have	been	writing	as	if	on
the	assumption	of	a	single	master	hand	or,	in	Kirk's	phrase,	monumental	poet.
23
Only	a	study	devoted	to	disintegration	would	proceed	otherwise.	Such	unity
cannot	be	proved,	though	the	burden	of	proof	is	on	the	analysts	rather	than	on
the	unitarians.	Such	unity	also,	if	it	exists,	is	qualified	by	the	conditions	of	oral
poetry,	namely,	the	accumulation	of	saga	material	(less	for	the	
Odyssey
	than	for
the	
Iliad
),	and	of	formulaic	language.
If	there	was	such	a	monumental	poet	for	the	
Odyssey
,	and	a	monumental
poet	for	the	
Iliad
,	were	they	the	same	man?	I	can	only	say	as	I	have	said	before:
that	this	cannot	be	proved;	but	that,	if	someone	not	Homer	composed	the
Odyssey
,	nobody	had	a	name	to	give	him;	and	that	the	burden	of	proof	rests	on
those	who	would	establish	separate	authorship.
Still,	it	is	well	to	note	some	of	the	similarities	and	differences	in	the	two
poems.	The	
Odyssey
,	like	the	
Iliad
,	ignores	historical	developments	between	the
time	of	the	originating	events	and	the	time	of	composition.	In	the	
Odyssey
,	as	in
the	
Iliad
,	this	principle	is	violated	by	occasional	slips,	the	so-called
anachronisms.	The	
Odyssey
	adds	a	few	of	its	own:	Sicilians,	Phoenicians	in	the
western	seas,	Dorians	in	Crete,	consultation	of	oracles.	Little	can	be	proved	by
this.	The	important	anachronisms	are	deeper	and	harder	to	assess.	How	far,	for
instance,	does	the	picture	of	Ithaka	reflect	life	in	a	Mycenaean	palace,	and	how
much	does	it	reflect	life	in	a	baronial	house	of	the	poet's	own	day,	centuries
later?
The	
Odyssey
	seems	later	than	the	
Iliad
	principally	because	it	assumes	the
existence	of	the	
Iliad
,	or	at	least	of	a	fully	told	tale	of	Troy.	That	does	not	mean
it	must	be	so	much	later	that	we	require	a	separate	author.	It	is	a	coherent	sequel
to	the	
Iliad
	and	does	not	contradict	it.
Consider	the	characters	who	are	carried	over	from	one	epic	to	the	other.
Judgment	of	characterization	is	admittedly	a	subjective	business.	For	what	my
opinion	is	worth,	I	would	say	that	Odysseus,	Nestor,	Agamemnon,	Menelaos,
Helen,	and	Achilleus	are	the	same	“people”	in	both	poems.
24
	Those	qualities
which	mark	the	Odysseus	of	the	
Odyssey
—strength	and	courage,	ingenuity,
patience	and	self-control—all	characterize	the	same	hero	in	the	
Iliad
.	His
friendship	with	the	Atreidae	and	Nestor,	suggested	in	the	
Iliad
,	is	still	more
notable	in	the	
Odyssey
.	And	in	the	
Iliad
	his	determination	to	win	the	war
matches	his	determination	to	win	the	homecoming	in	the	
Odyssey
.	To	achieve
both	ends,	he	is	ruthless.	Nestor	in	his	garrulity,	Agamemnon	in	his	self-pity,
Menelaos	in	his	courtesy	and	strong	moral	sense,	Achilleus	in	his	devotion	to	the
ideal	of	the	warrior,	all	repeat	striking	characteristics	of	the	persons	in	the	
Iliad
.
And	Helen	is	as	self-centered	as	ever;	in	neither	epic	can	she	make	a	speech
without	talking	about	herself.
All	this,	if	it	is	allowed,	does	not	of	course	prove	a	single	poet	for	the	two
poems.	It	could	mean	no	more	than	that	whoever	composed	the	
Odyssey
	knew
his	
Iliad
	well.	But	here	we	come	upon	a	striking	fact.	When	the	
Odyssey
recounts	episodes	from	the	tale	of	Troy,	these	episodes	are	never	a	part	of	the
Iliad
,	but	seem	to	fall	outside,	either	before	or	after,	the	action	of	the	
Iliad
.	Thus,
apart	from	the	Returns	or	
Nostoi
,	we	hear	of	the	following:
The	Trojan	Horse	and	the	final	battle	for	Troy,	iv.271-289;	viii.499-
520;	xi.523-537.
Odysseus'	spying	expedition	in	Troy,	iv.240-264	(rather	than	his
spying	expedition	with	Diomedes,	
Iliad
	X.254-578).
His	wrestling	match	with	Philomeleïdes	of	Lesbos,	iv.341-344
(rather	than	with	Aias,	
Iliad
	XXIII.707-737).
His	fight	in	defense	of	the	body	of	Achilleus,	v.308-310	(rather	than
his	fight	alone	against	the	Trojans	when	the	other	Achaians	had	fled,
Iliad
	XI.401-488).
The	quarrel	of	Odysseus	and	Achilleus,	viii.75-82	(rather	than	that
of	Agamemnon	and	Achilleus,	
Iliad
	I.1-305).
The	death	and	burial	of	Achilleus,	xxiv.35-94	(rather	than	the	death
and	burial	of	Patroklos).
The	quarrel	of	Odysseus	and	Aias	over	the	armor	of	Achilleus,
xi.541-564.
The	death	of	Antilochos,	iv.187-188;	199-202.
The	exploits	or	excellences	of	heroes	who	reached	Troy	after	the
action	of	the	
Iliad
	was	over,	such	as	Neoptolemos,	Eurypylos,	and
Memnon,	xi.505-537,	and	Philoktetes,	viii.219.
The	recruiting	of	the	heroes,	xxiv.114-119.
The	exclusion	of	Iliadic	episodes	from	the	
Odyssey
	can	scarcely	be
accidental.	We	are	left,	as	I	see	it,	to	choose	between	two	conclusions.	Either	the
poet	of	the	
Odyssey
	was	ignorant	of	the	
Iliad
;
25
	or	he	deliberately	avoided
trespassing	on	the	earlier	poem.	I	cannot	believe	in	the	first	alternative,	and	am
forced	to	choose	the	second.
What	are	the	other	important	
differences
	between	the	two	poems?	Every
Homeric	scholar	has	his	own	list,	and	I	must	be	brief.	To	me,	the	main
differences	are	details	of	the	whole	general	style	of	narrative.	The	
Odyssey
concentrates	on	relatively	small	groups.	Without	nations	embattled,	the
Olympians	of	the	
Iliad
	are	less	needed,	and	the	first-person	narrative	of	the	Great
Wanderings	virtually	excludes	them.	There	are	also	a	few	important	and	well-
known	differences	in	the	concept	of	the	divinities.	Hermes,	more	of	a	magician
than	Iris,	takes	over	her	functions	as	messenger.	Aphrodite,	not	Charis,	is	the
wife	of	Hephaistos.	Olympos	turns	into	a	never-never	land	(vi.41-47),	strangely
like	the	Elysian	Field	which	is	Menelaos’	destination	(iv.561-569),	and	well	in
accord	with	the	
Odyssey's
	wander-world	of	monsters	and	fairyland	people.
Invention	in	the	
Odyssey
	extends	to	name	making;	a	list	of	young	Phaiakians
shows	a	dozen	and	a	half	names,	all	meaning	something	to	do	with	seamanship
and	shipbuilding	(viii.111-115).	The	little	thumbnail	sketches	of	slaughtered
warriors	in	the	
Iliad
	have	a	more	traditional	sound;	such	sketches	are	rare	in	the
Odyssey
,	where	we	do	not	deal	in	large	masses.	The	poet	of	the	
Iliad
	shows
much	lyric	imagination	in	his	similes.	The	
Odyssey
	is	far	poorer	here,	and	much
of	the	same	material	is	used	differently.	Storms	in	the	
Iliad
	are	used
imaginatively	in	similes;	there	is	no	weather	in	the	
Iliad
.
26
	Storms	in	the
Odyssey
	are	something	Odysseus	must	contend	with.	The	humble	workingman
enters	the	
Iliad
	only	through	simile,	but	in	the	
Odyssey
	he	is	there	in	the	flesh.
When	we	come	to	language,	rhythm,	metrical	phrasing,	the	overmastering
impression	is	one	of	unity.	If	there	were	two	(or	more)	poets,	they	were	trained
in	the	same	tradition	of	formula.	Agamemnon	is	hailed	in	the	
Iliad
	(II.434,	etc.)
as
Son	of	Atreus,	most	lordly	and	king	of	men,	Agamemnon
,
and	so	he	is	in	the	
Odyssey
	when	the	occasion	arises	(xi.397).	His	answering
address	(xi.405),
Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus
,
is	common	to	both	epics.	So	is	the	summons	to	assembly	(
Iliad
	II.50-52;
Odyssey
	ii.6-8),	the	introduction	of	a	speaker	(
Iliad
	I.73,	etc.;	
Odyssey
	ii.160,
etc.),	the	course	of	ships	through	the	water	(
Iliad
	I.481-483;	
Odyssey
	ii.427-429).
In	both	epics,	children	are	innocent,	women	are	deep-girdled,	iron	is	gray,	ships
are	hollow,	words	are	winged	and	go	through	the	barrier	of	the	teeth,	the	sea	is
wine-blue,	barren,	and	salt,	bronze	is	sharp	and	pitiless.	The	list	is	almost
endless.	Even	the	Ithakans	are	strong-greaved	Achaians	(
Odyssey
	ii.72;	xx.146),
though	they	are	not	armed.
The	
Odyssey
	has	many	phrases,	journey	formulae	for	instance,	which	are	not
found	in	the	
Iliad
.
27
	Naturally,	the	
Iliad
	has	many	combat	formulae	which	are
missing	from	the	
Odyssey
.	But	when	combat	finally	ensues	between	Odysseus
and	the	suitors,	the	poet	repeats	brief	formulae	and	even	sizable	sequences
(compare	
Iliad
	XV.479-481	and	
Odyssey
	xxii.122-124).	Adaptation	may	be
necessary.	Amphinomos	goes	down,	
Odyssey
	xxii.94:
He	fell,	thunderously,	and	took	the	earth	full	on	his	forehead
.
We	cannot	quite	have	the	standard	
Iliad
	line:
He	fell,	thunderously,	and	his	armor	clattered	upon	him
.
Amphinomos	has	no	armor.	Occasionally,	a	few	lines	from	a	combat	in	the	
Iliad
can	fit	a	context	in	the	
Odyssey
	which	is	not	military.	The	language	for	the
Cyclops’	throwing	a	stone	is	the	same	as	that	used	for	Aias	(
Iliad
	VII.268-269;
Odyssey
	ix.537-538).	The	death	of	Odysseus’	steersman	(xii.412-414)	is	neatly
adapted	from	the	death	of	Epikles	on	the	wall	(
Iliad
	XII.384-386).
Can	the	formula	in	a	changed	setting	ever	mean	parody?	Sarpedon	advances
on	the	wall	of	the	Achaians	like	a	lion	against	a	guarded	sheepfold	(
Iliad
XII.299-301),	and	that	is	appropriate;	but	the	same	language	is	adapted	to
Odysseus’	embarrassed	advance	on	a	group	of	frightened	girls	(
Odyssey
	vi.130;
133-134).	When	Telemachos	sneezes,	the	sneeze	“clashed	horribly”	(
Odyssey
xvii.542);	the	phrase	was	used	of	the	helmet	of	Hektor	in	battle	(
Iliad
	XV.648)
and	other	warlike	noises.	Eumaios	is	called	
orchamos	andron
,	“leader	of	men”
(xiv.121).	This	could	mean	“foreman	(of	swineherds),”	which	is	what	he	is,	but	it
suggests	“commander	of	armies,”	which	is	what	it	means	in	the	
Iliad
.	It	has	been
suggested	that	the	arrangement	that	“noble	swineherd”	made	for	his	sows
reflected	those	made	by	Priam	for	his	daughters	(
Odyssey
	xiv.13-15;	
Iliad
VI.244-246).	There	are	other	such	combinations	which,	with	enough	good	will,
can	be	seen	as	parodies.	It	is	hard	to	be	sure,	but	such	amusements	with	formula
would	be	in	accord	with	the	generally	lighter	tone	of	the	
Odyssey
.
28
Yet	these	very	manipulations	of	metrical	phrases	attest	a	deep,	intimate
similarity	of	ear	and	verse	building	which	can	only	be	suggested	here.	We	can
illustrate	by	a	short	phrase	taken	almost	at	random:	
peri	chroï
,	which	means
“next	the	skin”	or	“around	the	body,”	and	having	the	metrical	scheme
.	It	is
used	in	a	dozen	
otherwise	quite	different
	lines	in	the	two	poems.	But	it	always
comes	in	exactly	the	same	place	in	the	line,	to	form	the	line-end	
.	This
shows	not	merely	the	reuse	of	materials,	but	a	constant	habit	of	metrical	thought.
There	is	much	that	is	obscure	about	the	functions	of	a	monumental	poet.
Within	the	limits	of	my	ignorance,	I	can	think	of	one	Homer,	composing,	or
completing,	first	the	
Iliad
,	then	the	
Odyssey
.	Or	I	can	think	of	an	old	master,
called	
Homer
,	mainly	responsible	for	the	
Iliad
;	and	a	young	master,	favored
apprentice	and	poetic	heir;	perhaps	a	nephew	or	son-in-law;	also	going	by	the
name,	or	assuming	the	name,	of	Homer;	and	mainly	responsible	for	the	
Odyssey
.
I	find	the	second	combination	more	persuasive,	but	that	is	all	I	can	say	for	it.
NOTE	ON	THE	TRANSLATION
In	my	translation,	I	have	followed	the	principles	stated	and	followed	in	my
translation	of	the	
Iliad
.	In	particular,	I	have	tried	to	follow,	as	far	as	the	structure
of	English	will	allow,	the	formulaic	practice	of	the	original.	Of	course	my
memory	has	failed	me	at	times	and	I	have	allowed	myself	some	liberties.
NOTE	ON	THE	TEXT
I	have	used	the	Oxford	text	of	T.	W.	Allen,	2nd	edition,	and	followed	it
except	in	a	very	few	places.	At	iv.515-521	I	have	followed	Bothe's	suggestion
and	transposed	the	lines;	the	numbers	show	the	original	order.	In	x.117,	I	read
the	singular	
nea
,	“the	(i.e.,	my)	ship”	instead	of	plural	
neas
,	“ships,”	which	is	in
the	manuscripts.	The	context	shows	that	Odysseus,	who	sent	the	men,	was
separated	from	his	main	fleet.	In	xiii.158,	I	follow	an	ancient	conjecture	and	read
m
e
de
	instead	of	the	manuscripts’
mega	de
.	In	xvii.531,	I	read	the	plural	
aut
o
n
instead	of	the	singular	
autou
,	which	is	in	the	manuscripts.
BOOK	I
Tell	me,	Muse,	of	the	man	of	many	ways,	who	was	driven
far	journeys,	after	he	had	sacked	
Troy's
	sacred	citadel.
Many	were	they	whose	cities	he	saw,	whose	minds	he	learned	of,
many	the	pains	he	suffered	in	his	spirit	on	the	wide	sea,
5	struggling	for	his	own	life	and	the	homecoming	of	his	companions.
Even	so	he	could	not	save	his	companions,	hard	though
he	strove	to;	they	were	destroyed	by	their	own	wild	recklessness,	fools,
who	devoured	the	oxen	of	
Helios
,	the	Sun	God,	and	he	took	away	the	day
of	their	homecoming.	From	some	point
10	here,	goddess,	daughter	of	
Zeus,
	speak,	and	begin	our	story.
Then	all	the	others,	as	many	as	fled	sheer	destruction,	were	at	home
now,	having	escaped	the	sea	and	the	fighting.
This	one	alone,	longing	for	his	wife	and	his	homecoming,
was	detained	by	the	queenly	nymph	
Kalypso,
	bright	among	goddesses,	15
in	her	hollowed	caverns,	desiring	that	he	should	be	her	husband.
But	when	in	the	circling	of	the	years	that	very	year	came	in	which	the	gods
had	spun	for	him	his	time	of	homecoming	to	
Ithaka,
	not	even	then	was	he
free	of	his	trials	nor	among	his	own	people.	But	all	the	gods	pitied	him
20	except	
Poseidon
;	he	remained	relentlessly	angry	with	godlike	
Odysseus
,
until	his	return	to	his	own	country.
But	Poseidon	was	gone	now	to	visit	the	far	Aithiopians,
Aithiopians,	most	distant	of	men,	who	live	divided,
some	at	the	setting	of	
Hyperion,
	some	at	his	rising,
The	council	of	the	gods
25	to	receive	a	hecatomb	of	bulls	and	rams.	There	he	sat	at	the	feast	and	took
his	pleasure.	Meanwhile	the	other	Olympian	gods	were	gathered	together
in	the	halls	of	Zeus.
First	among	them	to	speak	was	the	father	of	gods	and	mortals,
for	he	was	thinking	in	his	heart	of	stately	
Aigisthos
,	30	whom	
Orestes,
Agamemnon's	far-famed	son,	had	murdered.	Remembering	him	he	spoke
now	before	the	immortals:	‘Oh	for	shame,	how	the	mortals	put	the	blame
upon	us
gods,	for	they	say	evils	come	from	us,	but	it	is	they,	rather,
who	by	their	own	recklessness	win	sorrow	beyond	what	is	given,
35	as	now	lately,	beyond	what	was	given,	Aigisthos	married	the	wife	of
Atreus'
	son,	and	murdered	him	on	his	homecoming,	though	he	knew	it
was	sheer	destruction,	for	we	ourselves	had	told	him,	sending	
Hermes,
	the
mighty	watcher,	
Argeïphontes,
not	to	kill	the	man,	nor	court	his	lady	for	marriage;
40	for	vengeance	would	come	on	him	from	Orestes,	son	of	Atreides,
whenever	he	came	of	age	and	longed	for	his	own	country.
So	Hermes	told	him,	but	for	all	his	kind	intention	he	could	not
persuade	the	mind	of	Aigisthos.	And	now	he	has	paid	for	everything.'
Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	
Athene
	answered	him:	45	‘Son	of
Kronos,	our	father,	O	lordliest	of	the	mighty,	Aigisthos	indeed	has	been
struck	down	in	a	death	well	merited.
Let	any	other	man	who	does	thus	perish	as	he	did.
But	the	heart	in	me	is	torn	for	the	sake	of	wise	Odysseus,
unhappy	man,	who	still,	far	from	his	friends,	is	suffering
50	griefs,	on	the	sea-washed	island,	the	navel	of	all	the	waters,	a	wooded
island,	and	there	a	goddess	has	made	her	dwelling	place;	she	is	daughter
of	malignant	
Atlas,
	who	has	discovered	all	the	depths	of	the	sea,	and
himself	sustains	the	towering
columns	which	bracket	earth	and	sky	and	hold	them	together.
55	This	is	his	daughter;	she	detains	the	grieving,	unhappy	man,	and	ever	with
soft	and	flattering	words	she	works	to	charm	him	to	forget	Ithaka;	and	yet
Odysseus,
straining	to	get	sight	of	the	very	smoke	uprising
from	his	own	country,	longs	to	die.	But	you,	Olympian,
60	the	heart	in	you	is	heedless	of	him.	Did	not	Odysseus	do	you	grace	by	the
ships	of	the	Argives,	making	sacrifice	in	wide	Troy?	Why,	Zeus,	are	you
now	so	harsh	with	him?’
Then	in	turn	Zeus	who	gathers	the	clouds	made	answer:
and	the	wrath	of	Poseidon
‘My	child,	what	sort	of	word	escaped	your	teeth's	barrier?
65	How	could	I	forget	Odysseus	the	godlike,	he	who	is	beyond	all	other	men
in	mind,	and	who	beyond	others	has	given	sacrifice	to	the	gods,	who	hold
wide	heaven?
It	is	the	Earth	Encircler	Poseidon	who,	ever	relentless,
nurses	a	grudge	because	of	the	Cyclops,	whose	eye	he	blinded;
70	for	
Polyphemos
	like	a	god,	whose	power	is	greatest	over	all	the	Cyclopes.
Thoösa,
	a	nymph,	was	his	mother,	and	she	was	daughter	of	Phorkys,	lord
of	the	barren	salt	water.
She	in	the	hollows	of	the	caves	had	lain	with	Poseidon.
For	his	sake	Poseidon,	shaker	of	the	earth,	although	he	does	not
75	kill	Odysseus,	yet	drives	him	back	from	the	land	of	his	fathers.	But	come,
let	all	of	us	who	are	here	work	out	his	homecoming	and	see	to	it	that	he
returns.	Poseidon	shall	put	away
his	anger;	for	all	alone	and	against	the	will	of	the	other
immortal	gods	united	he	can	accomplish	nothing.’
80	Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	answered	him:	‘Son	of	Kronos,
our	father,	O	lordliest	of	the	mighty,	if	in	truth	this	is	pleasing	to	the
blessed	immortals
that	Odysseus	of	the	many	designs	shall	return	home,	then
let	us	dispatch	Hermes,	the	guide,	the	slayer	of	Argos,
85	to	the	island	of	
Ogygia,
	so	that	with	all	speed	he	may	announce	to	the
lovely-haired	nymph	our	absolute	purpose,	the	homecoming	of	enduring
Odysseus,	that	he	shall	come	back.
But	I	shall	make	my	way	to	Ithaka,	so	that	I	may
stir	up	his	son	a	little,	and	put	some	confidence	in	him
90	to	summon	into	assembly	the	flowing-haired	
Achaians
	and	make	a
statement	to	all	the	suitors,	who	now	forever	slaughter	his	crowding	sheep
and	lumbering	horn-curved	cattle;
and	I	will	convey	him	into	
Sparta
	and	to	sandy	
Pylos
to	ask	after	his	dear	father's	homecoming,	if	he	can	hear	something,	95	and
so	that	among	people	he	may	win	a	good	reputation.’
Speaking	so	she	bound	upon	her	feet	the	fair	sandals,	golden	and
immortal,	that	carried	her	over	the	water	as	over	the	dry	boundless	earth
abreast	of	the	wind's	blast.
Then	she	caught	up	a	powerful	spear,	edged	with	sharp	bronze,
100	heavy,	huge,	thick,	wherewith	she	beats	down	the	battalions	of	fighting
men,	against	whom	she	of	the	mighty	father	is	angered,
and	descended	in	a	flash	of	speed	from	the	peaks	of	
Olympos
,
Athene	disguised	as	Mentes
and	lighted	in	the	land	of	Ithaka,	at	the	doors	of	Odysseus
at	the	threshold	of	the	court,	and	in	her	hand	was	the	bronze	spear.
105	She	was	disguised	as	a	friend,	leader	of	the	
Taphians
,	
Mentes
.
There	she	found	the	haughty	suitors.	They	at	the	moment
in	front	of	the	doors	were	amusing	their	spirits	with	draughts	games,	sitting
about	on	skins	of	cattle	whom	they	had	slaughtered
themselves,	and	about	them,	of	their	heralds	and	hard-working	henchmen,
110	some	at	the	mixing	bowls	were	combining	wine	and	water,
while	others	again	with	porous	sponges	were	wiping	the	tables
and	setting	them	out,	and	others	cutting	meat	in	quantities.
Now	far	the	first	to	see	Athene	was	godlike	
Telemachos
,	as	he	sat
among	the	suitors,	his	heart	deep	grieving	within	him,
115	imagining	in	his	mind	his	great	father,	how	he	might	come	back
and	all	throughout	the	house	might	cause	the	suitors	to	scatter,
and	hold	his	rightful	place	and	be	lord	of	his	own	possessions.
With	such	thoughts,	sitting	among	the	suitors,	he	saw	Athene
and	went	straight	to	the	forecourt,	the	heart	within	him	scandalized	120
that	a	guest	should	still	be	standing	at	the	doors.	He	stood	beside	her	and
took	her	by	the	right	hand,	and	relieved	her	of	the	bronze	spear,	and	spoke
to	her	and	addressed	her	in	winged	words:	‘Welcome,	stranger.
You	shall	be	entertained	as	a	guest	among	us.	Afterward,
when	you	have	tasted	dinner,	you	shall	tell	us	what	your	need	is.’
125	So	speaking	he	led	the	way,	and	
Pallas
	Athene	followed	him.	Now,	when
the	two	of	them	were	inside	the	lofty	dwelling,	he	took	the	spear	he
carried	and	set	it	against	a	tall	column
in	a	rack	for	spears,	of	polished	wood,	where	indeed	there	were	other
spears	of	patient-hearted	Odysseus	standing	in	numbers,
130	and	he	led	her	and	seated	her	in	a	chair,	with	a	cloth	to	sit	on,	the	chair
splendid	and	elaborate.	For	her	feet	there	was	a	footstool.
For	himself,	he	drew	a	painted	bench	next	her,	apart	from	the	others,	the
suitors,	for	fear	the	guest,	made	uneasy	by	the	uproar,
might	lose	his	appetite	there	among	overbearing	people,
135	and	so	he	might	also	ask	him	about	his	absent	father.
A	maidservant	brought	water	for	them	and	poured	it	from	a	splendid	and
golden	pitcher,	holding	it	above	a	silver	basin
for	them	to	wash,	and	she	pulled	a	polished	table	before	them.
A	grave	housekeeper	brought	in	the	bread	and	served	it	to	them,
140	adding	many	good	things	to	it,	generous	with	her	provisions,
while	a	carver	lifted	platters	of	all	kinds	of	meat	and	set	them
visits	Telemachos
in	front	of	them,	and	placed	beside	them	the	golden	goblets,
and	a	herald,	going	back	and	forth,	poured	the	wine	for	them.
Then	the	haughty	suitors	came	in,	and	all	of	them	straightway
145	took	their	places	in	order	on	chairs	and	along	the	benches,
and	their	heralds	poured	water	over	their	hands	for	them	to	wash	with,	and
the	serving	maids	brought	them	bread	heaped	up	in	the	baskets,	and	the
young	men	filled	the	mixing	bowls	with	wine	for	their	drinking.
They	put	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
150	But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	the
suitors	found	their	attention	turned	to	other	matters,
the	song	and	the	dance;	for	these	things	come	at	the	end	of	the	feasting.
A	herald	put	the	beautifully	wrought	lyre	in	the	hands
of	
Phemios,
	who	sang	for	the	suitors,	because	they	made	him.
155	He	played	his	lyre	and	struck	up	a	fine	song.	Meanwhile
Telemachos	talked	to	Athene	of	the	gray	eyes,	leaning
his	head	close	to	hers,	so	that	none	of	the	others	might	hear	him:	‘Dear
stranger,	would	you	be	scandalized	at	what	I	say	to	you?
This	is	all	they	think	of,	the	lyre	and	the	singing.	Easy
160	for	them,	since	without	penalty	they	eat	up	the	substance
of	a	man	whose	white	bones	lie	out	in	the	rain	and	fester
somewhere	on	the	mainland,	or	roll	in	the	wash	of	the	breakers.
If	they	were	ever	to	see	him	coming	back	to	Ithaka
all	the	prayer	of	them	all	would	be	to	be	lighter	on	their	feet
165	instead	of	to	be	richer	men	for	gold	and	clothing.
As	it	is,	he	has	died	by	an	evil	fate,	and	there	is	no	comfort
left	for	us,	not	even	though	some	one	among	mortals
tells	us	he	will	come	back.	His	day	of	homecoming	has	perished.
But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
170	What	man	are	you,	and	whence?	Where	is	your	city?	Your	parents?
What	kind	of	ship	did	you	come	here	on?	And	how	did	the	sailors
bring	you	to	Ithaka?	What	men	do	they	claim	that	they	are?
For	I	do	not	think	you	could	have	traveled	on	foot	to	this	country.
And	tell	me	this	too,	tell	me	truly,	so	that	I	may	know	it.
175	Are	you	here	for	the	first	time,	or	are	you	a	friend	of	my	father's	from
abroad?	Since	many	other	men	too	used	to	come	and	visit
our	house,	in	the	days	when	he	used	to	go	about	among	people.’
Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	answered	him:
‘See,	I	will	accurately	answer	all	that	you	ask	me.
180	I	announce	myself	as	Mentes,	son	of	
Anchialos
Athene	disapproves	of	the	suitors
the	wise,	and	my	lordship	is	over	the	oar-loving	Taphians.
Now	I	have	come	in	as	you	see,	with	my	ship	and	companions
sailing	over	the	wine-blue	water	to	men	of	alien	language,
to	
Temese,
	after	bronze,	and	my	cargo	is	gleaming	iron.
185	And	my	ship	stands	near	by,	at	the	country,	away	from	the	city,
at	the	harbor,	
Rheithron,
	underneath	wooded	Neion.
Your	father	and	I	claim	to	be	guest-friends	by	heredity
from	far	back,	as	you	would	know	if	you	went	to	the	aged	hero
Laertes,
	who,	they	say,	no	longer	comes	to	the	city	190	now,	but	away	by
himself	on	his	own	land	leads	a	hard	life
with	an	old	woman	to	look	after	him,	who	serves	him	his	victuals
and	drink,	at	the	times	when	the	weariness	has	befallen	his	body
from	making	his	toilsome	way	on	the	high	ground	of	his	vineyard.
Now	I	have	come.	They	told	me	he	was	here	in	this	country,
195	your	father,	I	mean.	But	no.	The	gods	are	impeding	his	passage.
For	no	death	on	the	land	has	befallen	the	great	Odysseus,
but	somewhere,	alive	on	the	wide	sea,	he	is	held	captive,
on	a	sea-washed	island,	and	savage	men	have	him	in	their	keeping,	rough
men,	who	somehow	keep	him	back,	though	he	is	unwilling.
200	Now,	I	will	make	you	a	prophecy,	in	the	way	the	immortals
put	it	into	my	mind,	and	as	I	think	it	will	come	out,
though	I	am	no	prophet,	nor	do	I	know	the	ways	of	birds	clearly.
He	will	not	long	be	absent	from	the	beloved	land	of	his	fathers,
even	if	the	bonds	that	hold	him	are	iron,	but	he	will	be	thinking	205	of	a
way	to	come	back,	since	he	is	a	man	of	many	resources.
But	come	now	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
Are	you,	big	as	you	are,	the	very	child	of	Odysseus?
Indeed,	you	are	strangely	like	about	the	head,	the	fine	eyes,
as	I	remember;	we	used	to	meet	so	often	together
210	before	he	went	away	to	Troy,	where	others	beside	him
and	the	greatest	of	the	Argives	went	in	their	hollow	vessels.
Since	that	time	I	have	not	seen	Odysseus	nor	has	he	seen	me.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘See,	I	will	accurately	answer	all	that	you	ask	me.
215	My	mother	says	indeed	I	am	his.	I	for	my	part
do	not	know.	Nobody	really	knows	his	own	father.
But	how	I	wish	I	could	have	been	rather	son	to	some	fortunate
man,	whom	old	age	overtook	among	his	possessions.
But	of	mortal	men,	that	man	has	proved	the	most	ill-fated
and	Telemachos	explains
220	whose	son	they	say	I	am:	since	you	question	me	on	this	matter.’
Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	answered	him:
‘The	gods	have	not	made	yours	a	birth	that	will	go	nameless
hereafter,	since	
Penelope
	bore	such	a	son	as	you	are.
But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
225	What	feast	is	this,	what	gathering?	How	does	it	concern	you?
A	festival,	or	a	wedding?	Surely,	no	communal	dinner.
How	insolently	they	seem	to	swagger	about	in	their	feasting
all	through	the	house.	A	serious	man	who	came	in	among	them
could	well	be	scandalized,	seeing	much	disgraceful	behaviour.’
230	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:	‘My	guest,	since
indeed	you	are	asking	me	all	these	questions,	there	was	a	time	this	house
was	one	that	might	be	prosperous
and	above	reproach,	when	a	certain	man	was	here	in	his	country.
But	now	the	gods,	with	evil	intention,	have	willed	it	otherwise,
235	and	they	have	caused	him	to	disappear,	in	a	way	no	other
man	has	done.	I	should	not	have	sorrowed	so	over	his	dying
if	he	had	gone	down	among	his	companions	in	the	land	of	the	
Trojans
,	or
in	the	arms	of	his	friends,	after	he	had	wound	up	the	fighting.
So	all	the	Achaians	would	have	heaped	a	grave	mound	over	him,
240	and	he	would	have	won	great	fame	for	himself	and	his	son	hereafter.
But	now	ingloriously	the	stormwinds	have	caught	and	carried	him
away,	out	of	sight,	out	of	knowledge,	and	he	left	pain	and	lamentation	to
me.	Nor	is	it	for	him	alone	that	I	grieve	in	my	pain	now.
No	longer.	For	the	gods	have	inflicted	other	cares	on	me.
245	For	all	the	greatest	men	who	have	the	power	in	the	islands,
in	
Doulichion
	and	
Same
	and	in	wooded	
Zakynthos
,	and	all	who	in	rocky
Ithaka	are	holders	of	lordships,
all	these	are	after	my	mother	for	marriage,	and	wear	my	house	out.
And	she	does	not	refuse	the	hateful	marriage,	nor	is	she	able
250	to	make	an	end	of	the	matter;	and	these	eating	up	my	substance
waste	it	away;	and	soon	they	will	break	me	myself	to	pieces.’
Pallas	Athene	answered	him	in	great	indignation:
‘Oh,	for	shame.	How	great	your	need	is	now	of	the	absent
Odysseus,	who	would	lay	his	hands	on	these	shameless	suitors.
255	I	wish	he	could	come	now	to	stand	in	the	outer	doorway
of	his	house,	wearing	a	helmet	and	carrying	shield	and	two	spears,	the	way
he	was	the	first	time	that	ever	I	saw	him
in	our	own	house,	drinking	his	wine	and	taking	his	pleasure,
Telemachos	is	to	search	for	news	of	his	father
coming	in	from	
Ephyre
	and	from	
Ilos
	son	of	
Mermeros
.
260	Odysseus,	you	see,	had	gone	there	also	in	his	swift	ship
in	search	of	a	poison	to	kill	men,	so	he	might	have	it
to	smear	on	his	bronze-headed	arrows,	but	Ilos	would	not
give	him	any,	since	he	feared	the	gods	who	endure	forever.
But	my	father	did	give	it	to	him,	so	terribly	did	he	love	him.
265	I	wish	that	such	an	Odysseus	would	come	now	among	the	suitors.
They	all	would	find	death	was	quick,	and	marriage	a	painful	matter.
Yet	all	these	are	things	that	are	lying	upon	the	gods'	knees:
whether	he	will	come	home	to	his	vengeance,	here	in	his	household,	or
whether	he	will	not.	Rather	I	will	urge	you	to	consider
270	some	means	by	which	you	can	force	the	suitors	out	of	your	household.
Come	now,	pay	close	attention	to	me	and	do	as	I	tell	you.
Tomorrow,	summon	the	Achaian	warriors	into	assembly
and	publish	your	word	to	all,	let	the	gods	be	your	witnesses.
Tell	the	suitors	to	scatter	and	go	back	to	their	own	holdings,
275	and	as	for	your	mother,	if	the	spirit	urges	her	to	be	married,
let	her	go	back	to	the	palace	of	her	powerful	father,
and	they	shall	appoint	the	marriage	and	arrange	for	the	wedding	presents	in
great	amount,	as	ought	to	go	with	a	beloved	daughter.
But	for	yourself,	I	will	counsel	you	shrewdly,	and	hope	you	will	listen.
280	Fit	out	a	ship	with	twenty	oars,	the	best	you	can	come	by,
and	go	out	to	ask	about	your	father	who	is	so	long	absent,
on	the	chance	some	mortal	man	can	tell	you,	who	has	listened	to	Rumor
sent	by	Zeus.	She	more	than	others	spreads	news	among	people.
First	go	to	Pylos,	and	there	question	the	great	
Nestor
,	285	and	from	there
go	over	to	Sparta	to	see	fair-haired	Menelaos,
since	he	came	home	last	of	all	the	bronze-armored	Achaians.
Thus	if	you	hear	your	father	is	alive	and	on	his	way	home,
then,	hard	pressed	though	you	are,	you	should	still	hold	out	for	another
year.	But	if	you	hear	he	has	died	and	lives	no	longer,
290	then	make	your	way	home	to	the	beloved	land	of	your	fathers,
and	pile	up	a	tomb	in	his	honor,	and	there	make	sacrifices
in	great	amount,	as	is	fitting.	And	give	your	mother	to	a	husband.
Then,	after	you	have	made	an	end	of	these	matters,	and	done	them,	next
you	must	consider	well	in	your	heart	and	spirit
295	some	means	by	which	you	can	kill	the	suitors	who	are	in	your	household,
by	treachery	or	open	attack.	You	should	not	go	on
clinging	to	your	childhood.	You	are	no	longer	of	an	age	to	do	that.
Enter	Penelope
Or	have	you	not	heard	what	glory	was	won	by	great	Orestes
among	all	mankind,	when	he	killed	the	murderer	of	his	father,
300	the	treacherous	Aigisthos,	who	had	slain	his	famous	father?
So	you	too,	dear	friend,	since	I	can	see	you	are	big	and	splendid,	be	bold
also,	so	that	in	generations	to	come	they	will	praise	you.
But	now	it	is	time	for	me	to	go	back	down	to	my	fast	ship
and	my	companions,	who	must	be	very	restless	waiting
305	for	me.	Let	all	this	be	on	your	mind,	and	do	as	I	tell	you.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘My	guest,	your	words	to	me	are	very	kind	and	considerate,
what	any	father	would	say	to	his	son.	I	shall	not	forget	them.
But	come	now,	stay	with	me,	eager	though	you	are	for	your	journey,	310	so
that	you	may	first	bathe	and	take	your	ease	and,	well	rested
and	happy	in	your	heart,	then	go	back	to	your	ship	with	a	present,
something	prized,	altogether	fine,	which	will	be	your	keepsake
from	me,	what	loving	guests	and	hosts	bestow	on	each	other.’
Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	answered	him:
315	‘Do	not	detain	me	longer,	eager	as	I	am	for	my	journey;
and	that	gift,	whatever	it	is	your	dear	heart	bids	you	give	me,
save	it	to	give	when	I	come	next	time,	so	I	can	take	it
home;	and	choose	a	good	one,	and	a	fair	exchange	will	befall	you.’
So	spoke	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene,	and	there	she	departed
320	like	a	bird	soaring	high	in	the	air,	but	she	left	in	his	spirit
determination	and	courage,	and	he	remembered	his	father
even	more	than	he	had	before,	and	he	guessed	the	meaning,
and	his	heart	was	full	of	wonder,	for	he	thought	it	was	a	divinity.
At	once	he	went	over,	a	godlike	man,	to	sit	with	the	suitors.
325	The	famous	singer	was	singing	to	them,	and	they	in	silence	sat	listening.
He	sang	of	the	Achaians'	bitter	homecoming	from	Troy,	which	Pallas
Athene	had	inflicted	upon	them.
The	daughter	of	
Ikarios
,	circumspect	Penelope,	heard	and	heeded	the
magical	song	from	her	upper	chamber,
330	and	descended	the	high	staircase	that	was	built	in	her	palace,
not	all	alone,	since	two	handmaidens	went	to	attend	her.
When	she,	shining	among	women,	came	near	the	suitors,
she	stood	by	the	pillar	that	supported	the	roof	with	its	joinery,	holding	her
shining	veil	in	front	of	her	face,	to	shield	it,
335	and	a	devoted	attendant	was	stationed	on	either	side	of	her.
All	in	tears	she	spoke	then	to	the	divine	singer:
Penelope	dismissed
‘Phemios,	since	you	know	many	other	actions	of	mortals
and	gods,	which	can	charm	men's	hearts	and	which	the	singers	celebrate,
sit	beside	them	and	sing	one	of	these,	and	let	them	in	silence
340	go	on	drinking	their	wine,	but	leave	off	singing	this	sad
song,	which	always	afflicts	the	dear	heart	deep	inside	me,
since	the	unforgettable	sorrow	comes	to	me,	beyond	others,
so	dear	a	head	do	I	long	for	whenever	I	am	reminded
of	my	husband,	whose	fame	goes	wide	through	Hellas	and	midmost
Argos
.’
345	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:	‘Why,	my	mother,
do	you	begrudge	this	excellent	singer	his	pleasing	himself	as	the	thought
drives	him?	It	is	not	the	singers	who	are	to	blame,	it	must	be	Zeus	is	to
blame,	who	gives	out
to	men	who	eat	bread,	to	each	and	all,	the	way	he	wills	it.
350	There	is	nothing	wrong	in	his	singing	the	sad	return	of	the	
Danaans
.
People,	surely,	always	give	more	applause	to	that	song
which	is	the	latest	to	circulate	among	the	listeners.
So	let	your	heart	and	let	your	spirit	be	hardened	to	listen.
Odysseus	is	not	the	only	one	who	lost	his	homecoming
355	day	at	Troy.	There	were	many	others	who	perished,	besides	him.
Go	therefore	back	in	the	house,	and	take	up	your	own	work,
the	loom	and	the	distaff,	and	see	to	it	that	your	handmaidens
ply	their	work	also;	but	the	men	must	see	to	discussion,
all	men,	but	I	most	of	all.	For	mine	is	the	power	in	this	household.’
360	Penelope	went	back	inside	the	house,	in	amazement,	for	she	laid	the
serious	words	of	her	son	deep	away	in	her	spirit,	and	she	went	back	to	the
upper	story	with	her	attendant
women,	and	wept	for	Odysseus,	her	beloved	husband,	until
gray-eyed	Athene	cast	sweet	slumber	over	her	eyelids.
365	But	the	suitors	all	through	the	shadowy	halls	were	raising	a	tumult,	and	all
prayed	for	the	privilege	of	lying	beside	her,	until	the	thoughtful
Telemachos	began	speaking	among	them:
‘You	suitors	of	my	mother,	overbearing	in	your	rapacity,
now	let	us	dine	and	take	our	pleasure,	and	let	there	be	no
370	shouting,	since	it	is	a	splendid	thing	to	listen	to	a	singer
who	is	such	a	singer	as	this	man	is,	with	a	voice	such	as	gods	have.
Then	tomorrow	let	us	all	go	to	the	place	of	assembly,
and	hold	a	session,	where	I	will	give	you	my	forthright	statement,	that	you
go	out	of	my	place	and	do	your	feasting	elsewhere,
Telemachos	and	the	suitors
375	eating	up	your	own	possessions,	taking	turns,	household	by	household.
But	if	you	decide	it	is	more	profitable	and	better
to	go	on,	eating	up	one	man's	livelihood,	without	payment,
then	spoil	my	house.	I	will	cry	out	to	the	gods	everlasting
in	the	hope	that	Zeus	might	somehow	grant	a	reversal	of	fortunes.
380	Then	you	may	perish	in	this	house,	with	no	payment	given.’
So	he	spoke,	and	all	of	them	bit	their	lips,	in	amazement
at	Telemachos	and	the	daring	way	he	had	spoken	to	them.
It	was	
Antinoös
	the	son	of	
Eupeithes
	who	answered:	‘Telemachos,
surely	it	must	be	the	very	gods	who	prompt	you
385	to	take	the	imperious	line	and	speak	so	daringly	to	us.
I	hope	the	son	of	
Kronos
	never	makes	you	our	king	in	seagirt	Ithaka.
Though	to	be	sure	that	is	your	right	by	inheritance.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Antinoös,	in	case	you	wonder	at	what	I	am	saying,
390	I	would	be	willing	to	take	that	right,	if	Zeus	should	give	it.
Do	you	think	that	is	the	worst	thing	that	could	happen	to	anyone?
It	is	not	bad	to	be	a	king.	Speedily	the	king's	house
grows	prosperous,	and	he	himself	has	rank	beyond	others.
But	in	fact	there	are	many	other	Achaian	princes,
395	young	and	old,	in	seagirt	Ithaka,	any	of	whom	might
hold	this	position,	now	that	the	great	Odysseus	has	perished.
But	I	will	be	the	absolute	lord	over	my	own	household
and	my	servants,	whom	the	great	Odysseus	won	by	force	for	me.’
Then	in	turn	Eurymachos,	son	of	
Polybos
,	answered:	400	‘Telemachos,
these	matters,	and	which	of	the	Achaians	will	be	king	in	seagirt	Ithaka,	are
questions	that	lie	on	the	gods'	knees.
But	I	hope	you	keep	your	possessions	and	stay	lord	in	your	own	household.
May	the	man	never	come	who	against	your	will	and	by	force	shall	drive
you	away	from	your	holdings,	while	Ithaka	is	a	place	still	lived	in.
405	But,	best	of	men,	I	wish	to	ask	you	about	this	stranger,
where	he	came	from,	what	country	he	announces	as	being
his	own,	where	lies	his	parent	stock,	and	the	fields	of	his	fathers.
Has	he	brought	some	message	from	your	father	who	is	on	his	way	here?
Or	did	he	arrive	pursuing	some	matter	of	his	own	business?
410	How	suddenly	he	started	away	and	vanished,	and	did	not
wait	to	be	made	known.	He	was	no	mean	man,	by	the	look	of	him.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
All	retire
‘Eurymachos,	there	is	no	more	hope	of	my	father's	homecoming.
I	believe	no	messages	any	more,	even	should	there	be	one,
415	nor	pay	attention	to	any	prophecy,	those	times	my	mother
calls	some	diviner	into	the	house	and	asks	him	questions.
This	stranger	is	a	friend	of	my	father's.	He	comes	from	Taphos
and	announces	himself	as	Mentes,	the	son	of	Anchialos
the	wise.	And	he	is	lord	of	the	lovers	of	the	oar,	the	Taphians.’
420	So	spoke	Telemachos,	but	in	his	heart	he	knew	the	immortal	goddess.	The
others,	turning	to	the	dance	and	the	delightful	song,	took	their	pleasure
and	awaited	the	coming	of	evening,
and	the	black	evening	came	on	as	they	were	taking	their	pleasure.
Then	they	went	home	to	go	to	bed,	each	to	his	own	house,
425	but	Telemachos	went	where,	off	the	splendid	courtyard,	a	lofty
bedchamber	had	been	built	for	him,	in	a	sheltered	corner.
There	he	went	to	go	to	bed,	his	heart	full	of	problems,
and	devoted	
Eurykleia
	went	with	him,	and	carried	the	flaring	torches.	She
was	the	daughter	of	
Ops
	the	son	of	Peisenor,	430	and	Laertes	had	bought
her	long	ago	with	his	own	possessions
when	she	was	still	in	her	first	youth,	and	gave	twenty	oxen	for	her,	and	he
favored	her	in	his	house	as	much	as	his	own	devoted
wife,	but	never	slept	with	her,	for	fear	of	his	wife's	anger.
She	now	carried	the	flaring	torches	for	him.	She	loved	him
435	more	than	the	other	maidservants,	and	had	nursed	him	when	he	was	little.
He	opened	the	doors	of	the	close-compacted	bedchamber,
and	sat	down	on	the	bed	and	took	off	his	soft	tunic
and	put	it	into	the	hands	of	the	sagacious	old	woman,
and	she	in	turn	folded	the	tunic,	and	took	care	of	it	for	him,
440	and	hung	it	up	on	a	peg	beside	the	corded	bedstead.
Then	she	went	out	of	the	room,	and	pulled	the	door	to	behind	her
with	a	silver	hook,	and	with	a	strap	drew	home	the	door	bolt.
There,	all	night	long,	wrapped	in	a	soft	sheepskin,	he	pondered
in	his	heart	the	journey	that	Pallas	Athene	had	counseled.
BOOK	II
Now	when	the	young	
Dawn
	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,	the	dear
son	of	Odysseus	stirred	from	where	he	was	sleeping,	and	put	on	his
clothes,	and	slung	a	sharp	sword	over	his	shoulder.
Underneath	his	shining	feet	he	bound	the	fair	sandals
5	and	went	on	his	way	from	the	chamber,	like	a	god	in	presence.
He	gave	the	word	now	to	his	clear-voiced	heralds	to	summon	by
proclamation	to	assembly	the	flowing-haired	Achaians,
and	the	heralds	made	their	cry,	and	the	men	were	assembled	swiftly.
Now	when	they	were	all	assembled	in	one	place	together,
10	he	went	on	his	way	to	assembly,	in	his	hands	holding	a	bronze	spear,	not	all
alone,	but	a	pair	of	light-footed	dogs	went	with	him.
Athene	drifted	an	enchantment	of	grace	upon	him.
and	all	the	people	had	their	eyes	on	him	as	he	came	forward.
He	sat	in	his	father's	seat,	and	the	elders	made	way	before	him.
15	The	first	now	to	speak	to	them	was	the	hero	
Aigyptios
,	who	was	bent	over
with	age,	and	had	seen	things	beyond	number.
His	own	dear	son,	
Antiphos
	the	spearman,	had	gone	off	with	godlike
Odysseus	to	
Ilion
,	land	of	good	horses,	in	the	hollow	ships,	and	now	the
wild	Cyclops	had	killed	him	20	deep	in	his	cave,	and	this	was	the	last	man
he	had	eaten.
He	had	three	other	sons.	One	of	them,	
Eurynomos
,	went	with	the	suitors;
the	other	two	kept	the	estates	of	their	fathers.
Issues	in	Ithaka
Even	so,	he	could	not	forget	the	lost	one.	He	grieved	and	mourned	for	him,
and	it	was	in	tears	for	him,	now,	that	he	stood	forth	and	addressed	them:	25
‘Hear	me	now,	men	of	Ithaka,	and	the	word	I	give	you.
Never	has	there	been	an	assembly	of	us	or	any	session
since	great	Odysseus	went	away	in	the	hollow	vessels.
Now	who	has	gathered	us,	in	this	way?	What	need	has	befallen	which	of
the	younger	men,	or	one	of	us	who	are	older?
30	Has	he	been	hearing	some	message	about	the	return	of	the	army	which,
having	heard	it	first,	he	could	now	explain	to	us?
Or	has	he	some	other	public	matter	to	set	forth	and	argue?
I	think	he	is	a	good	man	and	useful.	So	may	Zeus	grant	him	good
accomplishment	for	whatever	it	is	his	mind	desires.’
35	He	spoke,	and	the	dear	son	of	Odysseus	was	glad	for	the	omen,	nor	did	he
remain	seated	long,	his	heart	was	for	speaking,	and	he	stood	in	the	middle
of	the	assembly.	The	herald	
Peisenor
,	a	man	of	deep	discretion,	put	into
his	hands	the	scepter.
First,	in	answer	to	the	old	man,	he	spoke	and	addressed	him:	40	‘Old	sir,
the	man	is	not	far,	but	here;	you	yourself	shall	know	him.
It	is	I	who	assembled	the	people.	To	me	this	grief	comes	closest.
Not	that	I	heard	some	message	about	the	return	of	the	army,	which,	having
heard	it	first,	I	could	now	explain	to	you;	nor	have	I	some	other	public
matter	to	set	forth	and	argue,	45	but	my	own	need,	the	evil	that	has	befallen
my	household.
There	are	two	evils.	I	have	lost	a	noble	father,	one	who
was	king	once	over	you	here,	and	was	kind	to	you	like	a	father;	and	now
here	is	a	greater	evil,	one	which	presently
will	break	up	the	whole	house	and	destroy	all	my	livelihood.
50	For	my	mother,	against	her	will,	is	beset	by	suitors,
own	sons	to	the	men	who	are	greatest	hereabouts.	These
shrink	from	making	the	journey	to	the	house	of	her	father	Ikarios,	so	that
he	might	take	bride	gifts	for	his	daughter	and	bestow	her	on	the	one	he
wished,	who	came	as	his	favorite;	55	rather,	all	their	days,	they	come	and
loiter	in	our	house	and	sacrifice	our	oxen	and	our	sheep	and	our	fat	goats
and	make	a	holiday	feast	of	it	and	drink	the	bright	wine
recklessly.	Most	of	our	substance	is	wasted.	We	have	no	man	here	such	as
Odysseus	was,	to	drive	this	curse	from	the	household.
Absence	of	Odysseus	and	persecution	by	the	suitors
60	We	ourselves	are	not	the	men	to	do	it;	we	must	be
weaklings	in	such	a	case,	not	men	well	seasoned	in	battle.
I	would	defend	myself	if	the	power	were	in	me.	No	longer
are	the	things	endurable	that	have	been	done,	and	beyond	all	decency	my
house	has	been	destroyed.	Even	you	must	be	scandalized	65	and	ashamed
before	the	neighboring	men	about	us,	the	people	who	live	around	our	land;
fear	also	the	gods'	anger,
lest	they,	astonished	by	evil	actions,	turn	against	you.
I	supplicate	you,	by	Zeus	the	Olympian	and	by	
Themis
who	breaks	up	the	assemblies	of	men	and	calls	them	in	session:	70	let	be,
my	friends,	and	leave	me	alone	with	my	bitter	sorrow	to	waste	away;
unless	my	noble	father	Odysseus
at	some	time	in	anger	did	evil	to	the	strong-greaved	Achaians,	for	which
angry	with	me	in	revenge	you	do	me	evil
in	setting	these	on	me.	But	for	me	it	would	be	far	better	75	for	you	to	eat
away	my	treasures	and	eat	my	cattle.
If	you	were	to	eat	them,	there	might	be	a	recompense	someday,	for	we
could	go	through	all	the	settlement,	with	claims	made	public	asking	for	our
goods	again,	until	it	was	all	regiven.
But	now	you	are	heaping	me	with	troubles	I	cannot	deal	with.’
80	So	he	spoke	in	anger,	and	dashed	to	the	ground	the	scepter	in	a	stormburst
of	tears;	and	pity	held	all	the	people.
Now	all	the	rest	were	stricken	to	silence,	none	was	so	hardy	as	to	answer,
angry	word	against	word,	the	speech	of	Telemachos.
It	was	Antinoös	alone	spoke	to	him	in	answer:
85	‘High-spoken	intemperate	Telemachos,	what	accusations	you	have	made	to
our	shame,	trying	to	turn	opinion	against	us!
And	yet	you	have	no	cause	to	blame	the	Achaian	suitors,
but	it	is	your	own	dear	mother,	and	she	is	greatly	resourceful.
And	now	it	is	the	third	year,	and	will	be	the	fourth	year	presently,	90	since
she	has	been	denying	the	desires	of	the	Achaians.
For	she	holds	out	hope	to	all,	and	makes	promises	to	each	man,	sending	us
messages,	but	her	mind	has	other	intentions.
And	here	is	another	stratagem	of	her	heart's	devising.
She	set	up	a	great	loom	in	her	palace,	and	set	to	weaving	95	a	web	of
threads	long	and	fine.	Then	she	said	to	us:
“Young	men,	my	suitors	now	that	the	great	Odysseus	has	perished,	wait,
though	you	are	eager	to	marry	me,	until	I	finish
this	web,	so	that	my	weaving	will	not	be	useless	and	wasted.
The	charms	and	guile	of	Penelope
This	is	a	shroud	for	the	hero	Laertes,	for	when	the	destructive	100	doom	of
death	which	lays	men	low	shall	take	him,	lest	any	Achaian	woman	in	this
neighborhood	hold	it	against	me
that	a	man	of	many	conquests	lies	with	no	sheet	to	wind	him.”
So	she	spoke,	and	the	proud	heart	in	us	was	persuaded.
Thereafter	in	the	daytime	she	would	weave	at	her	great	loom,	105	but	in
the	night	she	would	have	torches	set	by,	and	undo	it.
So	for	three	years	she	was	secret	in	her	design,	convincing	the	Achaians,
but	when	the	fourth	year	came	with	the	seasons	returning,	one	of	her
women,	who	knew	the	whole	of	the	story,	told	us,	and	we	found	her	in	the
act	of	undoing	her	glorious	weaving.
110	So,	against	her	will	and	by	force,	she	had	to	finish	it.
Now	the	suitors	answer	you	thus,	so	that	you	yourself
may	know	it	in	your	mind,	and	all	the	Achaians	may	know	it:	send	your
mother	back,	and	instruct	her	to	be	married
to	any	man	her	father	desires	and	who	pleases	her	also.
115	But	if	she	continues	to	torment	the	sons	of	the	Achaians,	since	she	is	so
dowered	with	the	wisdom	bestowed	by	Athene,	to	be	expert	in	beautiful
work,	to	have	good	character
and	cleverness,	such	as	we	are	not	told	of,	even	of	the	ancient	queens,	the
fair-tressed	Achaian	women	of	times	before	us,	120	Tyro	and	
Alkmene
	and
Mykene
,	wearer	of	garlands;	for	none	of	these	knew	thoughts	so	wise	as
those	Penelope	knew;	yet	in	this	single	matter	she	did	not	think	rightly;	so
long,	I	say,	will	your	livelihood	and	possessions	be	eaten	away,	as	long	as
she	keeps	this	purpose,	one	which	the	very	125	gods,	I	think,	put	into	her
heart.	She	is	winning	a	great	name	for	herself,	but	for	you	she	is	causing
much	loss	of	substance.
We	will	not	go	back	to	our	own	estates,	nor	will	we	go	elsewhere	until	she
marries	whichever	Achaian	man	she	fancies.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
130	‘Antinoös,	I	cannot	thrust	the	mother	who	bore	me,
who	raised	me,	out	of	the	house	against	her	will.	My	father,	alive	or	dead,
is	elsewhere	in	the	world.	It	will	be	hard	to	pay	back	Ikarios,	if	willingly	I
dismiss	my	mother.
I	will	suffer	some	evil	from	her	father,	and	the	spirit	will	give	me	135	more
yet,	for	my	mother	will	call	down	her	furies	upon	me	as	she	goes	out	of	the
house,	and	I	shall	have	the	people's	resentment.	I	will	not	be	the	one	to	say
that	word	to	her.
Favorable	portents
But	as	for	you,	if	your	feeling	is	scandalized	by	my	answer,	go	away	from
my	palace	and	do	your	feasting	elsewhere,
140	eating	up	your	own	possessions,	taking	turns,	household	by	household.
But	if	you	decide	it	is	more	profitable	and	better
to	go	on,	eating	up	one	man's	livelihood,	without	payment,	then	spoil	my
house.	I	will	cry	out	to	the	gods	everlasting	in	the	hope	that	Zeus	might
somehow	grant	a	reversal	of	fortunes.
145	Then	you	may	perish	in	this	house	with	no	payment	given.’
So	spoke	Telemachos,	and	for	his	sake	Zeus	of	the	wide	brows
sent	forth	two	eagles,	soaring	high	from	the	peak	of	the	mountain.
These	for	a	while	sailed	on	the	stream	of	the	wind	together,	wing	and	wing,
close	together,	wings	spread	wide.	But	when	150	they	were	over	the
middle	of	the	vociferous	assembly,
they	turned	on	each	other	suddenly	in	a	thick	shudder
of	wings,	and	swooped	over	the	heads	of	all,	with	eyes	glaring	and	deadly,
and	tore	each	other	by	neck	and	cheek	with	their	talons,	then	sped	away	to
the	right	across	the	houses	and	city.
155	Then	all	were	astounded	at	the	birds,	when	their	eyes	saw	them,	and	they
pondered	in	their	hearts	over	what	might	come	of	it,	and	
Halitherses
,
Mastor's
	son,	an	aged	warrior,	spoke	to	them.	He	was	far	beyond	the	men
of	his	generation	in	understanding	the	meaning	of	birds	and	reading	their
portents.
160	Now,	in	kind	intention	toward	all,	he	spoke	and	addressed	them:	‘Hear	me
now,	men	of	Ithaka,	what	I	have	to	tell	you;
but	what	I	say	will	be	mostly	a	warning	to	the	suitors,
for	a	great	disaster	is	wheeling	down	on	them.	Surely	Odysseus	will	not	be
long	away	from	his	family,	but	now,	already,
165	is	somewhere	close	by,	working	out	the	death	and	destruction	of	all	these
men,	and	it	will	be	an	evil	for	many	others
of	us	who	inhabit	sunny	Ithaka.	So,	well	beforehand,
let	us	think	how	we	can	make	them	stop,	or	better	let	them	stop
themselves.	It	will	soon	be	better	for	them	if	they	do	so.
170	I	who	foretell	this	am	not	untried,	I	know	what	I	am	saying.
Concerning	him,	I	say	that	everything	was	accomplished
in	the	way	I	said	it	would	be	at	the	time	the	Argives	took	ship	for	Ilion,	and
with	them	went	resourceful	Odysseus.
I	said	that	after	much	suffering,	with	all	his	companions	175	lost,	in	the
twentieth	year,	not	recognized	by	any,
he	would	come	home.	And	now	all	this	is	being	accomplished.’
The	suitors	refuse	to	leave
Then	in	turn	
Eurymachos
,	son	of	Polybos,	answered:	‘Old	sir,	better	go
home	and	prophesy	to	your	children,
for	fear	they	may	suffer	some	evil	to	come.	In	these	things	180	I	can	give	a
much	better	interpretation	than	you	can.
Many	are	the	birds	who	under	the	sun's	rays	wander
the	sky;	not	all	of	them	mean	anything;	Odysseus
is	dead,	far	away,	and	how	I	wish	that	you	had	died	with	him	also.	Then
you	would	not	be	announcing	all	these	predictions,	185	nor	would	you	so
stir	up	Telemachos,	who	is	now	angry,
looking	for	the	gift	for	your	own	household,	which	he	might	give	you.
But	I	will	tell	you	straight	out,	and	it	will	be	a	thing	accomplished:	if	you,
who	know	much	and	have	known	it	long,	stir	up	a	younger	man,	and	by
talking	him	round	with	words	encourage	his	anger,	190	then	first	of	all,	it
will	be	the	worse	for	him;	he	will	not	on	account	of	all	these	sayings	be
able	to	accomplish	anything;	and	on	you,	old	sir,	we	shall	lay	a	penalty,
and	it	will	grieve	your	mind	as	you	pay	it,	and	that	for	you	will	be	a	great
sorrow.
I	myself,	before	you	all,	will	advise	Telemachos.
195	Let	him	urge	his	mother	to	go	back	to	her	father's,
and	they	shall	appoint	the	marriage	and	arrange	for	the	wedding	presents	in
great	amount,	as	ought	to	go	with	a	beloved	daughter.
For	I	think	the	sons	of	the	Achaians	will	not	give	over
their	harsh	courtship,	for	in	any	case	we	fear	no	one,
200	and	surely	not	Telemachos,	for	all	he	is	so	eloquent.
Nor	do	we	care	for	any	prophecy,	which	you,	old	sir,
may	tell	us,	which	will	not	happen,	and	will	make	you	even	more	hated;
and	his	possessions	will	wretchedly	be	eaten	away,	there	will	not	be
compensation,	ever,	while	she	makes	the	Achaians	put	off	205	marriage
with	her,	while	we,	awaiting	this,	all	our	days	quarrel	for	the	sake	of	her
excellence,	nor	ever	go	after	others,	whom	any	one	of	us	might	properly
marry.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Eurymachos,	and	all	you	others	who	are	haughty	suitors,
210	I	no	longer	entreat	you	in	these	matters,	nor	speak	about	them,	since	by
now	the	gods	know	about	this,	as	do	all	the	Achaians.
But	come	now,	grant	me	a	swift	ship,	and	twenty	companions	who	can
convey	me	on	a	course	from	one	place	to	another.
For	I	am	going	to	Sparta	and	going	to	sandy	Pylos
215	to	ask	about	the	homecoming	of	my	father,	who	is	long	absent,
Telemachos	requests	a	ship
on	the	chance	of	some	mortal	man	telling	me,	or	of	hearing	a	Rumor	sent
by	Zeus.	She	more	than	others	spreads	news	among	people.
Then	if	I	hear	my	father	is	alive	and	on	his	way	home,
then,	hard	pressed	though	I	be,	I	will	still	hold	out	for	another	220	year.
But	if	I	hear	he	has	died	and	lives	no	longer,
then	I	will	make	my	way	home	to	the	beloved	land	of	my	fathers,	and	pile
up	a	tomb	in	his	honor,	and	there	make	sacrifices	in	great	amount,	as	is
fitting.	And	give	my	mother	to	a	husband.’
So	he	spoke,	and	sat	down	again,	and	among	them	rose	up
225	
Mentor
,	who	once	had	been	the	companion	of	stately	Odysseus,	and
Odysseus,	going	on	the	ships,	had	turned	over	the	household	to	the	old
man,	to	keep	it	well,	and	so	all	should	obey	him.
He	in	kind	intention	now	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them:
‘Hear	me	now,	men	of	Ithaka,	what	I	have	to	tell	you.
230	No	longer	now	let	one	who	is	a	sceptered	king	be	eager
to	be	gentle	and	kind,	be	one	whose	thought	is	schooled	in	justice,	but	let
him	always	rather	be	harsh,	and	act	severely,
seeing	the	way	no	one	of	the	people	he	was	lord	over
remembers	godlike	Odysseus,	and	he	was	kind,	like	a	father.
235	Now	it	is	not	so	much	the	proud	suitors	I	resent
for	doing	their	violent	acts	by	their	minds'	evil	devising;	for	they	lay	their
heads	on	the	line	when	violently	they	eat	up	the	house	of	Odysseus,	who,
they	say	to	themselves,	will	not	come	back;	but	now	I	hold	it	against	you
other	people,	how	you	all
240	sit	there	in	silence,	and	never	with	an	assault	of	words	try	to	check	the
suitors,	though	they	are	so	few,	and	you	so	many.’
Then	
Leokritos
,	son	of	
Euenor
,	spoke	forth	against	him:	‘Mentor,
reckless	in	words,	wild	in	your	wits,	what	a	thing	you	have	said,	urging
them	to	stop	us.	It	would	be	difficult	245	even	with	more	men	than	these	to
fight	us	over	our	feasting.
For	even	if	Odysseus	of	Ithaka	himself	were	to
come	back,	and	find	the	haughty	suitors	feasting	in	his	house,	and	be
urgent	in	his	mind	to	drive	them	out	of	his	palace,	his	wife	would	have	no
joy	of	his	coming,	though	she	longs	for	it	250	greatly,	but	rather	he	would
meet	an	unworthy	destiny
if	he	fought	against	too	many.	You	have	spoken	to	no	purpose.
Come	then,	all	people	disperse	now,	each	to	his	own	holdings,	and	Mentor
and	Halitherses	will	push	forward	this	man's	journey,	since	these	from	the
first	have	been	his	friends,	as	friends	of	his	father.
End	of	assembly
255	But,	I	think,	he	will	sit	still	for	a	long	time,	waiting	for	messages	here	in
Ithaka,	and	will	never	accomplish	this	voyage.’
So	he	spoke,	and	suddenly	broke	up	the	assembly,
and	the	people	scattered	and	went	their	ways,	each	to	his	own	house,	while
the	suitors	went	away	into	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus.
260	But	Telemachos,	walking	along	the	sea	beach	away	from	the	others,
washed	his	hands	in	the	gray	salt	water	and	prayed	to	Athene:	‘Hear	me,
you	who	came	yesterday,	a	god,	into	our	house
and	urged	me	on	to	go	by	ship	out	over	the	misty
face	of	the	sea,	to	ask	about	the	homecoming	of	my	father	265	who	is	so
long	absent:	now	all	this	is	delayed	by	the	Achaians	and	particularly	the
suitors	in	their	evil	overconfidence.’
So	he	spoke	in	prayer,	and	from	nearby	Athene	came	to	him
likening	herself	to	Mentor	in	voice	and	appearance.
Now	she	spoke	aloud	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	270
‘Telemachos,	you	are	to	be	no	thoughtless	man,	no	coward,	if	truly	the
strong	force	of	your	father	is	instilled	in	you;	such	a	man	he	was	for
accomplishing	word	and	action.
Your	journey	then	will	be	no	vain	thing	nor	go	unaccomplished.
But	if	you	are	not	the	seed	begotten	of	him	and	Penelope,	275	I	have	no
hope	that	you	will	accomplish	all	that	you	strive	for.
For	few	are	the	children	who	turn	out	to	be	equals	of	their	fathers,	and	the
greater	number	are	worse;	few	are	better	than	their	father	is.
But	since	you	are	to	be	no	thoughtless	man,	no	coward,
and	the	mind	of	Odysseus	has	not	altogether	given	out	in	you,	280	there	is
some	hope	that	you	can	bring	all	these	things	to	fulfillment.
So	now,	let	be	the	purpose	and	the	planning	of	these	senseless	suitors,
since	they	are	neither	thoughtful	men	nor	just	men,	and	have	not	realized
the	death	and	black	fatality
that	stands	close	by,	so	that	on	a	day	they	all	must	perish.
285	And	that	journey	for	which	you	are	so	urgent	will	not	be	long	now,	such	a
companion	am	I	to	you,	as	of	your	father.
I	will	fit	you	out	a	fast	ship,	I	myself	will	go	with	you.
But	now	you	must	go	back	to	the	house,	and	join	the	suitors,	and	get	ready
provisions	for	the	journey,	pack	all	in	containers,	290	have	wine	in	handled
jars,	and	barley	meal,	men's	marrow,	in	thick	leather	bags,	and	I,	going
round	the	town,	will	assemble	volunteer	companions	to	go	with	you.	There
are	ships	in	plenty	here	in	seagirt	Ithaka,	both	old	and	new	ones,
Athene	as	Mentor	advises	Telemachos
and	I	will	look	them	over	for	you	to	find	out	the	best	one,	295	and	soon	we
shall	stow	our	gear	and	put	out	onto	the	wide	sea.’
So	spoke	Athene,	daughter	of	Zeus,	nor	did	Telemachos
delay	long	after	he	had	heard	the	voice	of	the	goddess,
but	went	on	his	way	to	the	house,	the	heart	troubled	within	him.
He	came	upon	the	haughty	suitors,	there	in	his	palace,
300	skinning	goats	and	singeing	fatted	swine	in	the	courtyard.
Antinoös,	with	a	smile,	came	straight	up	to	Telemachos,
and	took	him	by	the	hand	and	spoke	and	named	him,	saying:	‘High-spoken
intemperate	Telemachos,	now	let	no	other
evil	be	considered	in	your	heart,	neither	action
305	nor	word,	but	eat	and	drink	with	me,	as	you	did	in	past	time.
The	Achaians	will	see	to	it	that	all	these	things	are	accomplished,	the	ship,
and	chosen	companions,	so	that	you	may	the	more	quickly	reach	sacred
Pylos,	after	news	about	your	proud	father.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
310	‘Antinoös,	there	is	no	way	for	me	to	dine	with	you
against	my	will,	and	take	my	ease,	when	you	are	so	insolent.
Is	it	not	enough,	you	suitors,	that	in	time	past	you	ruined	my	great	and
good	possessions,	when	I	was	still	in	my	childhood?
But	now,	when	I	am	grown	big,	and	by	listening	to	others
315	can	learn	the	truth,	and	the	anger	is	steaming	up	inside	me,	I	will
endeavor	to	visit	evil	destructions	upon	you,
either	by	going	to	Pylos,	or	remaining	here	in	the	district.
But	I	will	go;	that	journey	I	speak	of	will	not	be	made	void;	but	as	a
passenger;	for	I	control	no	ship,	not	any
320	companions;	this,	I	think,	was	the	way	you	wished	to	have	it.’
He	spoke,	and	lightly	drew	away	his	hand	from	Antinoös'
hand,	but	the	suitors	about	the	house	prepared	their	dinner,	and	in	their
conversation	they	insulted	him	and	mocked	him,	and	thus	would	go	the
word	of	one	of	the	arrogant	young	men:	325	‘Surely	now	Telemachos	is
devising	our	murder.
Either	he	will	bring	some	supporters	from	sandy	Pylos,
or	even	from	Sparta,	now	he	is	so	terribly	eager;
or	perhaps	his	purpose	is	to	go	to	Ephyre,	that	rich
corn	land,	so	that	thence	he	can	bring	back	poisonous	medicines	330	and
put	them	into	our	wine	bowl,	and	so	destroy	all	of	us.’
And	thus	would	speak	another	one	of	these	arrogant	young	men:
‘Who	knows	whether,	when	he	goes	in	a	hollow	ship,	he	also
The	ship	is	ready
might	perish	straying	far	from	his	people,	as	did	Odysseus?
Were	this	to	happen,	he	would	lighten	all	our	work	for	us.
335	Then	we	could	divide	up	his	possessions,	and	give	the	house	to	this	man's
mother	to	keep,	and	to	the	man	who	marries	her.’
So	they	spoke,	but	he	went	down	into	his	father's	high-roofed
and	wide	storeroom,	where	gold	and	bronze	were	lying	piled	up,	and
abundant	clothing	in	the	bins,	and	fragrant	olive	oil,	340	and	in	it	jars	of
wine,	sweet	to	drink,	aged,
were	standing,	keeping	the	unmixed	divine	drink	inside	them,	lined	up	in
order	close	to	the	wall,	for	the	day	when	Odysseus	might	come	home	even
after	laboring	through	many	hardships.
To	close	it	there	were	double	doors	that	fitted	together
345	with	two	halves,	and	there	by	night	and	day	was	a	woman
in	charge	who,	with	intelligent	care,	watched	over	all	this,	Eurykleia	the
daughter	of	Ops	the	son	of	Peisenor.
Now	Telemachos	called	her	to	the	room,	and	spoke	to	her:
‘Dear	nurse,	come,	draw	me	some	sweet	wine	in	the	handled	350	jars,
choicest	of	all	you	have	in	your	keeping,	next	after	what	you	are	saving	for
the	ill-fated	man,	the	day	when	Zeus-sprung	Odysseus	might	come	home,
escaping	death	and	its	spirits.
Fill	me	twelve	in	all	and	fit	them	all	with	covers.
And	pour	me	barley	into	bags	stitched	strongly,	of	leather.
355	Let	me	have	twenty	measures	of	the	choice	milled	barley.	You	be	the	only
one	that	knows	this.	Let	all	be	gathered	together,	for	I	will	pick	it	up	in	the
evening,	after	my	mother
climbs	to	her	upper	chamber	and	is	ready	for	sleeping.
For	I	am	going	into	Sparta	and	to	sandy	Pylos,
360	to	ask	after	my	dear	father's	homecoming,	if	I	might	hear	something.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	dear	nurse	Eurykleia	cried	out,
and	bitterly	lamenting	she	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	‘Why,	my
beloved	child,	has	this	intention	come	into
your	mind?	Why	do	you	wish	to	wander	over	much	country,
365	you,	an	only	and	loved	son?	Illustrious	Odysseus
has	perished	far	from	his	country	in	some	outlandish	region.
And	these	men	will	devise	evils	against	you,	on	your	returning,	so	you
shall	die	by	guile,	and	they	divide	all	that	is	yours.
No,	but	stay	here	and	guard	your	possessions.	It	is	not	right	370	for	you	to
wander	and	suffer	hardships	on	the	barren	wide	sea.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
Preparations	for	sailing
‘Do	not	fear,	nurse.	This	plan	was	not	made	without	a	god's	will.
But	swear	to	tell	my	beloved	mother	nothing	about	this
until	the	eleventh	day	has	come	or	the	twelfth	hereafter,	375	or	until	she
misses	me	herself	or	hears	I	am	absent,
so	that	she	may	not	ruin	her	lovely	skin	with	weeping.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	old	woman	swore	to	the	gods	a	great	oath,
and	after	she	had	sworn	to	it	and	completed	the	oath	taking,	she	drew	the
wine	in	the	handled	jars	at	once	thereafter
380	and	poured	his	barley	into	bags	stitched	strongly	of	leather,	but
Telemachos	went	back	into	the	house	and	joined	the	suitors.
Now	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	thought	what	to	do	next.
In	the	likeness	of	Telemachos	she	went	all	through	the	city	and,	standing
beside	each	man	as	she	came	to	him,	told	them	385	all	to	assemble	beside
the	fast	ship	in	the	evening.
Then	she	asked	
Noëmon
,	the	glorious	son	of	
Phronios
,	for	a	fast	ship.	And
he	with	good	will	promised	it	to	her.
And	the	sun	set,	and	all	the	journeying	ways	were	darkened.
Now	she	drew	the	fast	ship	down	to	the	sea,	and	in	her
390	stowed	all	the	running	gear	that	strong-benched	vessels	carry.
She	set	it	at	the	edge	of	the	harbor,	and	around	her	the	good	companions
thronged	and	were	assembled	and	the	goddess	urged	on	each	man.
Now	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	thought	what	to	do	next.
She	went	on	her	way,	into	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus,
395	and	there	she	drifted	a	sweet	slumber	over	the	suitors,
and	struck	them	as	they	drank,	and	knocked	the	goblets	out	of	their	hands,
and	they	went	to	sleep	in	the	city,	nor	did	any	one	sit	long,	after	sleep	was
fallen	upon	his	eyelids.
Afterward	gray-eyed	Athene	spoke	to	Telemachos
400	when	she	had	called	him	out	from	the	well-established	palace,	likening
herself	to	Mentor	in	voice	and	appearance:
‘Telemachos,	already	now	your	strong-greaved	companions
are	sitting	at	the	oars,	and	waiting	for	you	to	set	forth.
So	let	us	go,	and	not	delay	our	voyaging	longer.’
405	So	spoke	Pallas	Athene,	and	she	led	the	way	swiftly,	and	the	man
followed	behind	her	walking	in	the	god's	footsteps.
But	when	they	had	come	down	to	the	sea,	and	where	the	ship	was,	they
found	the	flowing-haired	companions	there	by	the	seashore.
Now	the	hallowed	prince,	Telemachos,	spoke	his	word	to	them:	410	‘Here,
friends,	let	us	carry	the	provisions.	They	are	all	ready
The	sailing
and	stacked	in	the	hall.	But	my	mother	has	been	told	nothing	of	this,	nor
the	rest	of	the	serving	women.	Only	one	knows	the	story.’
So	he	spoke	and	led	the	way,	and	the	rest	went	with	him.
They	all	carried	the	provisions	down,	and	stowed	them	in	the	strong-
benched	415	vessel,	in	the	way	the	dear	son	of	Odysseus	directed	them.
Telemachos	went	aboard	the	ship,	but	Athene	went	first
and	took	her	place	in	the	stern	of	the	ship,	and	close	beside	her	Telemachos
took	his	place.	The	men	cast	off	the	stern	cables	and	themselves	also	went
aboard	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks.
420	The	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	sent	them	a	favoring	stern	wind,	strong
Zephyros,	who	murmured	over	the	wine-blue	water.
Telemachos	then	gave	the	sign	and	urged	his	companions
to	lay	hold	of	the	tackle,	and	they	listened	to	his	urging	and,	raising	the
mast	pole	made	of	fir,	they	set	it	upright	425	in	the	hollow	hole	in	the	box,
and	made	it	fast	with	forestays,	and	with	halyards	strongly	twisted	of
leather	pulled	up	the	white	sails.
The	wind	blew	into	the	middle	of	the	sail,	and	at	the	cutwater	a	blue	wave
rose	and	sang	strongly	as	the	ship	went	onward.
She	ran	swiftly,	cutting	across	the	swell	her	pathway.
430	When	they	had	made	fast	the	running	gear	all	along	the	black	ship,	then
they	set	up	mixing	bowls,	filling	them	brimful
with	wine,	and	poured	to	the	gods	immortal	and	everlasting	but	beyond	all
other	gods	they	poured	to	Zeus'	gray-eyed	daughter.
All	night	long	and	into	the	dawn	she	ran	on	her	journey.
BOOK	III
Helios,	leaving	behind	the	lovely	standing	waters,	rose	up
into	the	brazen	sky	to	shine	upon	the	immortals
and	also	on	mortal	men	across	the	grain-giving	farmland.
They	came	to	Pylos,	Neleus'	strong-founded	citadel,
5	where	the	people	on	the	shore	of	the	sea	were	making	sacrifice
of	bulls	who	were	all	black	to	the	dark-haired	Earthshaker.
There	were	nine	settlements	of	them,	and	in	each	five	hundred
holdings,	and	from	each	of	these	nine	bulls	were	provided.
Now	as	these	tasted	the	entrails,	and	burned,	for	the	god,	the	thigh	bones,
10	these	others	put	straight	in,	and	on	the	balanced	ship	took	off	the	sails,
and	stowed	them,	and	moored	her	in,	and	themselves	landed.
Telemachos	stepped	out	of	the	ship,	but	Athene	went	first,
and	it	was	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	who	first	spoke	to	him:
‘Telemachos,	here	is	no	more	need	at	all	of	modesty;
15	for	this	was	why	you	sailed	on	the	open	sea,	to	find	news
of	your	father,	what	soil	covers	him,	what	fate	he	has	met	with.
So	come	now,	go	straight	up	to	Nestor,	breaker	of	horses,
for	we	know	what	intelligence	is	hidden	inside	him.
You	yourself	must	entreat	him	to	speak	the	whole	truth	to	you.
20	He	will	not	tell	you	any	falsehood;	he	is	too	thoughtful.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘Mentor,	how	shall	I	go	up	to	him,	how	close	with	him?
I	have	no	experience	in	close	discourse.	There	is
embarrassment	for	a	young	man	who	must	question	his	elder.’
Entertainment	by	Nestor
25	Then	in	turn	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	answered	him:
‘Telemachos,	some	of	it	you	yourself	will	see	in	your	own	heart,	and	some
the	divinity	will	put	in	your	mind.	I	do	not
think	you	could	have	been	born	and	reared	without	the	gods'	will.’
So	spoke	Pallas	Athene,	and	she	led	the	way	swiftly,
30	and	the	man	followed	behind	her	walking	in	the	god's	footsteps.
They	came	to	where	the	men	of	Pylos	were	gathered	in	session,
where	Nestor	was	sitting	with	his	sons,	and	companions	about	him	were
arranging	the	feast,	and	roasting	the	meat,	and	spitting	more	portions.
These	men,	when	they	sighted	the	strangers,	all	came	down	together	35
and	gave	them	greeting	with	their	hands	and	offered	them	places.
First	
Peisistratos
,	son	of	Nestor,	came	close	up	to	them	and	took	them	both
by	the	hands,	and	seated	them	at	the	feasting	on	soft	rugs	of	fleece	there	on
the	sand	of	the	seashore
next	to	his	brother	
Thrasymedes
	and	next	to	his	father.
40	He	gave	them	portions	of	the	vitals,	and	poured	wine	for	them
in	a	golden	cup,	and	spoke	a	word	to	both	of	them,	pledging
Pallas	Athene,	who	is	daughter	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis:
‘My	guest,	make	your	prayer	now	to	the	lord	Poseidon,
for	his	is	the	festival	you	have	come	to	on	your	arrival;
45	but	when	you	have	poured	to	him	and	prayed,	according	to	custom,	then
give	this	man	also	a	cup	of	the	sweet	wine,	so	that
he	too	can	pour,	for	I	think	he	also	will	make	his	prayer
to	the	immortals.	All	men	need	the	gods.	But	this	one
is	a	younger	man	than	you,	and	of	the	same	age	as	I	am.
50	This	is	why	I	am	first	giving	you	the	golden	goblet.’
So	he	spoke,	and	put	in	her	hand	the	cup	of	sweet	wine,
and	Athene	was	happy	at	the	thoughtfulness	of	a	just	man,
because	it	was	to	her	he	first	gave	the	golden	goblet.
Immediately	she	made	her	prayer	to	the	lord	Poseidon:
55	‘Hear	us,	Poseidon,	who	circle	the	earth,	and	do	not	begrudge	us	the
accomplishment	of	all	these	actions	for	which	we	pray	you.
First	of	all	to	Nestor	and	to	his	sons	grant	glory,
and	then	on	all	the	rest	of	the	Pylians	besides	confer
gracious	recompense	in	return	for	this	grand	hecatomb,
60	and	yet	again	grant	that	Telemachos	and	I	go	back
with	that	business	done	for	which	we	came	this	way	in	our	black	ship.’
She	spoke	in	prayer,	but	herself	was	bringing	it	all	to	completion.
Telemachos	asks	after	Odysseus
Next	she	gave	Telemachos	the	fine	two-handled	goblet,
and	the	dear	son	of	Odysseus	prayed	in	the	way	that	she	had.
65	When	they	had	roasted	and	taken	off	the	spits	the	outer
meats,	dividing	shares	they	held	their	communal	high	feast.
But	when	they	had	put	aside	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	first	to
speak	was	the	
Gerenian
	horseman,	Nestor:	‘Now	is	a	better	time	to
interrogate	our	guests	and	ask
70	them	who	they	are,	now	they	have	had	the	pleasure	of	eating.
Strangers,	who	are	you?	From	where	do	you	come	sailing	over	the	watery
ways?	Is	it	on	some	business,	or	are	you	recklessly	roving
as	pirates	do,	when	they	sail	on	the	salt	sea	and	venture
their	lives	as	they	wander,	bringing	evil	to	alien	people?’
75	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer,
taking	courage,	for	Athene	herself	had	put	that	courage
in	his	heart,	so	that	he	might	ask	after	his	absent	father,
and	so	that	among	people	he	might	win	a	good	reputation:
‘O	Nestor,	Neleus'	son,	great	glory	of	the	Achaians,
80	you	ask	us	where	we	come	from.	Therefore	I	will	tell	you.
We	come	from	Ithaka	under	the	mountain	Neion.	This	is
a	private	matter,	no	public	business,	of	which	I	tell	you.
I	follow	the	wide	fame	of	my	father,	on	the	chance	of	hearing
of	the	great	patient-hearted	Odysseus,	the	man	they	say	once
85	fought	beside	you	and	helped	sack	the	city	of	the	Trojans.
For	we	have	been	told	about	all	the	other	men	who	once	fought
the	Trojans,	how	each	one	of	them	perished	in	sad	destruction,
but	the	son	of	Kronos	has	made	this	man's	death	one	that	none	knows.
There	is	no	man	who	can	plainly	tell	us	when	he	perished,
90	whether	he	was	killed	on	the	mainland	by	men	embattled
or	on	the	open	sea	in	the	billows	of	
Amphitrite
.
That	is	why	I	come	to	your	knees	now,	in	case	you	might	wish
to	tell	me	of	his	dismal	destruction,	whether	you	saw	it
perhaps	with	your	own	eyes,	or	heard	the	tale	from	another
95	who	wandered	too.	His	mother	bore	this	man	to	be	wretched.
Do	not	soften	it	because	you	pity	me	and	are	sorry
for	me,	but	fairly	tell	me	all	that	your	eyes	have	witnessed.
I	implore	you,	if	ever	noble	Odysseus,	my	father,
ever	undertook	any	word	or	work	and	fulfilled	it
100	for	you,	in	the	land	of	the	Trojans	where	you	Achaians	suffered,	tell	me
these	things	from	your	memory.	And	tell	me	the	whole	truth.’
Nestor	remembers	Troy
In	turn	Nestor	the	Gerenian	horseman	answered	him:
‘Dear	friend,	since	you	remind	me	of	sorrows	which	in	that	country	we
endured,	we	sons	of	the	Achaians	valiant	forever,
105	or	all	we	endured	in	our	ships	on	the	misty	face	of	the	water
cruising	after	plunder	wherever	Achilleus	led	us,
or	all	we	endured	about	the	great	city	of	the	lord	
Priam
fighting;	and	all	who	were	our	best	were	killed	in	that	place;
there	Aias	lies,	a	man	of	battles,	there	lies	Achilleus,
110	there	lies	
Patroklos
,	one	who	was	like	the	gods	for	counsel,	and	there	lies
my	own	beloved	son,	both	strong	and	stately,
Antilochos
,	surpassingly	swift	to	run,	and	a	fighter;	and	many	besides
these	were	the	evils	we	suffered;	what	man
who	was	one	of	the	mortal	people	could	ever	tell	the	whole	of	it,	115	not	if
you	were	to	sit	beside	me	five	years,	and	six	years,
and	asked	me	about	the	evils	the	great	Achaians	endured	there;
sooner	you	would	be	tired	of	it	and	go	back	to	your	country.
For	nine	years	we	fabricated	evils	against	them,	trying	them
with	every	kind	of	stratagem,	and	at	last	the	son	of	Kronos
120	finished	it.	Then	there	was	no	man	who	wanted	to	be	set	up
for	cunning	against	great	Odysseus;	he	far	surpassed	them
in	every	kind	of	stratagem;	your	father;	if	truly
you	are	his	son;	and	wonder	seizes	me	when	I	look	on	you.
For	surely	your	words	are	like	his	words,	nor	would	anyone
125	ever	have	thought	that	a	younger	man	could	speak	so	like	him.
For	while	I	and	the	great	Odysseus	were	there	together,
we	never	spoke	against	one	another,	neither	in	council
nor	assembly,	but	forever	one	in	mind	and	in	thoughtful
planning,	we	worked	out	how	things	would	go	best	for	the	Argives.
130	But	after	we	had	sacked	the	sheer	citadel	of	Priam,
and	were	going	away	in	our	ships,	and	the	god	scattered	the	Achaians,	then
Zeus	in	his	mind	devised	a	sorry	homecoming
for	the	Argives,	since	not	all	were	considerate	nor	righteous;
therefore	many	of	them	found	a	bad	way	home,	because	of
135	the	ruinous	anger	of	the	Gray-eyed	One,	whose	father	is	mighty.
It	was	she	who	made	a	quarrel	between	the	two	sons	of	Atreus.
When	these	two	called	all	the	Achaians	into	assembly,
wildly,	and	in	no	kind	of	order,	as	the	sun	was	setting,
and	the	sons	of	the	Achaians	came	in,	heavy	with	drinking
140	wine,	these	two	spoke	forth.	It	was	why	they	assembled	the	people.
and	the	start	of	the	homecoming
At	this	time	Menelaos	was	urging	all	the	Achaians
to	think	upon	going	home	over	the	sea's	wide	ridges,
but	this	did	not	please	
Agamemnon
	at	all;	he	wished	rather	to	hold	the
people	there,	and	accomplish	holy	hecatombs
145	so	as	to	soften	Athene's	deadly	anger,	poor	fool
who	had	no	thought	in	his	mind	that	she	would	not	listen	to	him.
The	will	of	the	everlasting	gods	is	not	turned	suddenly.
So	these	two,	after	making	exchange	with	hard	words,	stood	up
to	go,	and	the	rest	of	the	strong-greaved	Achaians	rushed	out
150	with	inhuman	clamor,	and	two	opposed	counsels	pleased	them.
That	night	we	slept	there,	pondering	in	our	minds	hard	thoughts	against
each	other;	Zeus	was	contriving	pain	of	hardship.
At	dawn,	some	of	us	hauled	our	ships	down	into	the	divine	sea,
and	loaded	our	possessions	aboard,	and	the	deep-girdled	women.
155	But	half	the	people	were	held	back	because	they	remained	there	with
Agamemnon,	Atreus'	son,	shepherd	of	the	people.
We	the	other	half	went	aboard	and	drove	on,	and	the	ships	went
very	fast,	as	a	god	flattened	the	sea	full	of	monsters.
We	came	to	
Tenedos
	and	made	sacrifice	to	the	immortals.
160	We	were	straining	homeward;	but	Zeus,	hard-hearted,	was	not	yet
devising	homecoming	for	us,	but	again	inspired	yet	another	quarrel.
Then	some,	who	followed	the	lord	Odysseus,	the	wise	and	resourceful,
turned	about,	and	boarding	once	more	their	oarswept	vessels
went	back,	bringing	comfort	to	Atreus'	son,	Agamemnon.
165	But	I,	with	all	the	ships	that	followed	pulled	together,
fled	away,	for	I	saw	how	the	god	was	devising	evils,
and	the	warlike	son	of	
Tydeus
	fled	and	urged	his	companions	on,	and,	late,
fair-haired	Menelaos	came	to	join	us
and	caught	us	at	Lesbos	as	we	pondered	our	long	sea-voyage,
170	whether	we	should	sail	over	the	top	of	rocky	
Chios
by	the	island	
Psyros
,	keeping	it	on	our	left	hand,	or	else	to	pass	under
Chios,	by	windy	
Mimas
.	We	asked	the	god	to	give	us	some	portent	for	a
sign,	and	the	god	gave	us
one,	and	told	us	to	cut	across	the	middle	main	sea
175	for	
Euboia
,	and	so	most	quickly	escape	the	hovering	evil.
A	whistling	wind	rose	up	and	began	to	blow	and	the	ships	ran
very	fast	across	those	ways	full	of	fish,	and	at	nighttime
brought	us	in	at	
Geraistos
.	We	sacrificed	many	thigh	bones
The	murder	of	Agamemnon
of	bulls	to	Poseidon,	having	measured	the	great	open	water.
180	It	was	the	fourth	day	when	the	companions	of	
Diomedes
breaker	of	horses,	Tydeus'	son,	made	fast	their	balanced
ships	at	Argos.	I	held	on	for	Pylos.	Never	once
did	the	wind	fail,	once	the	god	had	set	it	to	blowing.
So,	dear	child,	I	came	back,	without	news,	and	I	knew	nothing
185	of	those	other	Achaians,	which	had	survived,	which	ones	had	perished.
But	all	I	have	got	by	hearsay	sitting	here	in	my	palace,
this	you	shall	know;	it	is	right	you	should;	I	will	not	conceal	it.
They	say	that	the	
Myrmidons
,	those	furious	spearmen	led	by	the	glorious
son	of	great-hearted	Achilleus	made	a	good	voyage,	190	and	
Philoktetes
,
Poias
'	shining	son,	had	fair	sailing,	and	
Idomeneus
	brought	back	to	
Crete
all	of	his	companions	who	had	escaped	from	the	fighting.	The	sea	took
none	of	these	men.
You	yourselves,	though	you	live	apart,	have	heard	of	
Atreides
,	how	he
came	home,	and	how	Aigisthos	devised	his	wretched
195	death;	but	Aigisthos	too	paid	for	it,	in	a	dismal	fashion;
so	it	is	good,	when	a	man	has	perished,	to	have	a	son	left
after	him,	since	this	one	took	vengeance	on	his	father's	killer,	the
treacherous	Aigisthos,	who	cut	down	his	glorious	father.
So	you	too,	dear	friend,	for	I	see	you	are	tall	and	splendid,
200	be	brave	too,	so	that	men	unborn	may	speak	well	of	you.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘O	Nestor,	son	of	Neleus,	great	glory	of	the	Achaians,
it	is	all	too	true	that	he	took	revenge,	and	so	the	Achaians
will	carry	his	glory	far	and	wide,	a	theme	for	the	singers
205	to	come.	If	only	the	gods	would	give	me	such	strength	as	he	has	to	take
revenge	on	the	suitors	for	their	overbearing	oppression.
They	force	their	way	upon	me	and	recklessly	plot	against	me.
No,	the	gods	have	spun	out	no	such	strand	of	prosperity
for	me	and	my	father.	Now	we	must	even	have	to	endure	it.’
210	Then	in	turn	Nestor	the	Gerenian	horseman	answered	him:
‘Dear	friend,	since	you	have	spoken	about	these	things	and	reminded	me,
they	do	say	that	many	suitors	for	the	sake	of	your	mother
are	in	your	palace	against	your	will,	and	plot	evil	against	you.
Tell	me,	are	you	willingly	put	down,	or	are	the	people
215	who	live	about	you	swayed	by	some	divine	voice,	and	hate	you?
Who	knows	whether	he	will	come	someday	and	punish	the	violence
of	these	people,	either	by	himself	or	all	the	Achaians	with	him?
Telemachos	asks	for	details
If	only	gray-eyed	Athene	would	deign	to	love	you,	as	in
those	days	she	used	so	to	take	care	of	glorious	Odysseus
220	in	the	Trojan	country,	where	we	Achaians	suffered	miseries;
for	I	never	saw	the	gods	showing	such	open	affection
as	Pallas	Athene,	the	way	she	stood	beside	him,	openly;
if	she	would	deign	to	love	you	as	she	did	him,	and	care	for	you	in	her
heart,	then	some	of	those	people	might	well	forget	about	marrying.’
225	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Old	sir,	I	think	that	what	you	have	said	will	not	be	accomplished.
What	you	mean	is	too	big.	It	bewilders	me.	That	which	I	hope	for	could
never	happen	to	me,	not	even	if	the	gods	so	willed	it.’
Now	in	turn	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	spoke	to	him:
230	‘Telemachos,	what	sort	of	word	escaped	your	teeth's	barrier?
Lightly	a	god,	if	he	wishes,	can	save	a	man,	even	from	far	off.
I	myself	would	rather	first	have	gone	through	many	hardships
and	then	come	home,	and	look	upon	my	day	of	returning,
than	come	home	and	be	killed	at	my	own	hearth,	as	Agamemnon
235	was	killed,	by	the	treacherous	plot	of	his	wife,	and	by	Aigisthos.
But	death	is	a	thing	that	comes	to	all	alike.	Not	even
the	gods	can	fend	it	away	from	a	man	they	love,	when	once
the	destructive	doom	of	leveling	death	has	fastened	upon	him.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
240	‘Mentor,	though	we	sorrow	let	us	speak	no	more	of	these	things.
His	homecoming	is	no	longer	a	real	thing,	but	already
the	immortal	gods	must	have	contrived	his	death	and	black	doom.
But	now	I	would	find	out	about	another	story,	and	question
Nestor,	since	the	righteousness	and	thought	in	his	mind	outpass	245	others',
and	they	say	he	has	been	lord	over	three	generations
of	men.	He	shapes	as	an	immortal	for	me	to	look	upon.
O	Nestor,	son	of	Neleus,	tell	me	the	true	story.
How	did	Atreus'	son,	widely	ruling	Agamemnon,
die?	And	where	was	Menelaos?	What	scheme	of	death
250	did	treacherous	Aigisthos	have,	to	kill	one	far	better	than	he	was?
Was	Menelaos	out	of	Achaia	and	Argos,	wandering
elsewhere	among	men,	that	Aigisthos	had	courage	to	do	it?’
Then	in	turn	Nestor	the	Gerenian	horseman	answered:
‘So,	my	child,	I	will	relate	you	the	whole	true	story.
255	All	would	have	happened	just	in	the	way	you	yourself	have	seen	it,	if
Atreus'	son,	fair-haired	Menelaos,	on	his	homecoming
The	murder	of	Agamemnon
from	Troy	had	found	Aigisthos	still	alive	in	his	palace.
Even	after	his	death	none	would	have	heaped	any	earth	upon	him,	but	he
would	have	lain	in	the	field	outside	the	city,	and	the	dogs	260	and	birds
would	have	feasted	on	him,	nor	would	any	Achaian	woman	have	wailed
over	him.	That	was	a	monstrous	plot	he	accomplished.
For	we	were	sitting	out	there	and	accomplishing	many	hard	tasks	while	he,
at	ease	deep	in	the	corner	of	horse-pasturing	Argos,
kept	talking	to	Agamemnon's	wife	and	trying	to	charm	her.
265	Now	in	time	before,	beautiful	
Klytaimestra
would	not	consent	to	the	act	of
shame,	for	her	own	nature	was	honest,
and	also	a	man	was	there,	a	singer,	whom	Agamemnon,
when	he	went	to	Troy,	had	given	many	instructions	to	keep	watch	on	his
wife;	but	when	the	doom	of	the	gods	had	entangled	her,	so	that	270	she
must	submit,	Aigisthos	took	the	singer	and	left	him
on	a	desert	island	for	the	birds	of	prey	to	spoil	and	feed	on,
and	took	her	back	to	his	house,	and	she	was	willing	as	he	was.
Then	on	the	sacred	altars	of	the	gods	he	burned	many	thigh	bones	and	hung
up	many	dedications,	gold,	and	things	woven,
275	for	having	accomplished	this	monstrous	thing	he	never	had	hoped	for.
Now	we	sailed	back	on	our	way	from	Troy	together,	Atreus'
son,	Menelaos,	and	I,	with	friendly	thoughts	toward	each	other,	but	when
we	came	to	holy	
Sounion
,	the	cape	of	
Athens
,	there	
Phoibos
	
Apollo
,	with	a
visitation	of	his	painless	280	arrows,	killed	the	steersman	of	Menelaos,	the
one	who
held	in	his	hands	the	steering	oar	of	the	running	ship.	This	was	
Phrontis
,
Onetor's
	son,	who	surpassed	all	the	breed	of	mortals	in	the	steering	of	a
ship	whenever	stormwinds	were	blowing.
So	Menelaos,	though	straining	for	the	journey,	was	detained
285	there,	to	bury	his	companion,	and	give	him	due	rites.
But	when	he	too	had	gone	out	on	the	wine-blue	open	water
in	his	hollow	ships,	and	made	his	run	as	far	as	the	steep	rock
of	
Maleia
,	then	Zeus	of	the	wide	brows	devised	that	his	journey	should	be
hateful,	and	poured	out	upon	him	the	blast	of	shrilling	290	winds,	and
waves	that	bulged	and	grew	monstrous,	like	mountains.
There	he	cut	the	fleet	in	two	parts,	and	drove	some	on	Crete
where	the	
Kydonians
	lived	around	the	streams	of	
Iardanos
.
There	is	the	sheer	of	a	cliff,	a	steep	rock	out	in	the	water
at	the	other	end	of	
Gortys
	on	the	misty	face	of	the	main,	where	295	the
south	wind	piles	up	a	huge	surf	on	the	left	of	the	rock	horn
and	the	wanderings	of	Menelaos
toward	
Phaistos
,	and	a	little	stone	holds	out	the	big	water.
It	was	there	they	came,	and	by	lively	work	the	men	avoided
destruction,	but	the	waves	smashed	their	ships	on	the	splinters	of	rock,	but
the	wind	and	the	water	catching	up	the	other
300	five	dark-prowed	ships	bore	them	along	and	drove	them	on	
Egypt
.
So	Menelaos,	gathering	much	gold	and	livelihood	in	those
parts,	sailed	with	his	ships	to	men	of	alien	language,
and	all	the	while	at	home	Aigisthos	worked	out	his	grim	plans.
Seven	years	he	lived	as	lord	over	golden	Mykene,
305	after	he	killed	Atreides,	with	the	people	subject	beneath	him,	but	in	the
eighth	the	evil	came	on	him,	great	Orestes
come	home	from	Athens,	and	he	killed	his	father's	murderer,
the	treacherous	Aigisthos,	who	had	killed	his	glorious	father.
When	he	had	killed,	he	ordered	among	the	
Argives
	a	grave	mound	310	for
his	mother	who	was	hateful	and	for	unwarlike	Aigisthos;
and	on	the	same	day	Menelaos	of	the	great	war	cry	sailed	in
bringing	back	many	possessions,	the	burden	his	ships	carried.
So,	dear	friend,	do	not	you	stay	long	and	far	wandering
away	from	home,	leaving	your	possessions,	and	in	your	house	men	315	so
overbearing,	for	fear	they	divide	up	all	your	property
and	eat	it	away,	so	all	your	journey	will	have	no	profit.
And	yet	I	do	encourage	you	and	urge	you	to	visit
Menelaos,	for	he	is	newly	come	from	abroad,	and	people
who	live	where	no	man's	mind	would	ever	have	hope	of	returning,	320
once	the	stormwinds	had	blundered	him	off	his	course	and	into
an	open	sea	that	is	so	great	that	not	the	birds	even
cross	it	by	their	own	strength,	it	is	so	big	and	terrible.
But	go	to	him	now,	with	your	ship	and	with	your	companions,
or	if	you	wish	to	go	by	land,	here	are	horses	and	chariot,
325	and	here	are	my	own	sons	at	your	service,	who	will	be	your	escorts	into
shining	
Lakedaimon
,	the	home	of	fair-haired	Menelaos.
You	yourself	must	entreat	him	to	speak	the	whole	truth	to	you.
He	will	not	tell	you	any	falsehood;	he	is	too	thoughtful.'
So	he	spoke,	and	the	sun	went	down	and	the	darkness	came	over,
330	and	now	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	spoke	forth	before	them:
‘Old	sir,	all	that	you	have	said	was	fair	and	orderly.
But	come	now,	cut	out	the	tongues	of	the	victims	and	mix	the	wine	bowls,
so	that	when	we	have	poured	an	offering	to	Poseidon
and	the	other	immortals,	we	can	think	about	sleep.	It	is	that	time.
Departure	of	Athene
335	For	now	the	light	has	gone	into	the	darkness,	nor	is	it	becoming	to	sit
about	at	the	feast	of	the	gods;	but	better	to	go	home.’
So	she	spoke,	the	daughter	of	Zeus,	and	they	listened	to	her.
The	heralds	poured	water	over	their	hands	to	wash	with,
and	the	young	men	filled	the	mixing	bowls	with	wine	for	their	drinking,
340	and	passed	to	all,	after	they	had	offered	a	drink	in	the	goblets.
They	threw	the	tongues	in	the	fire	and	stood	up	and	made	a	libation.
But	when	they	had	poured	and	drunk	each	as	much	as	he	wanted,
then	Athene	and	godlike	Telemachos	started
up	together	to	go	away	to	their	hollow	vessel,
345	but	Nestor	detained	them	where	they	were,	and	made	a	speech	to	them:
‘May	Zeus	and	all	the	other	immortals	beside	forfend
that	you,	in	my	domain,	should	go	on	back	to	your	fast	ship
as	from	some	man	altogether	poor	and	without	clothing,
who	has	not	any	abundance	of	blankets	and	rugs	in	his	household	350	for
his	guests,	or	for	himself	to	sleep	in	soft	comfort.
But	I	do	have	abundance	of	fine	rugs	and	blankets.
No,	no,	in	my	house	the	dear	son	of	Odysseus	shall	not
have	to	go	to	sleep	on	the	deck	of	a	ship,	as	long	as
I	am	alive,	and	my	sons	after	me	are	left	in	my	palace
355	to	entertain	our	guests,	whoever	comes	to	my	household.’
Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	said	to	him:
‘This	was	well	said	by	you,	dear	old	sir;	it	is	fitting
that	Telemachos	should	obey	you,	since	it	is	much	better	that	way.
So	he	shall	go	along	with	you	now,	so	that	he	can	sleep
360	in	your	palace,	but	I	shall	be	going	down	to	my	black	ship,
so	that	I	can	encourage	my	companions	and	tell	them	everything.
For	I	am	the	only	man	among	them	who	can	call	myself
an	elder;	the	rest,	all	of	an	age	with	the	great-hearted
Telemachos,	are	younger	men	who	out	of	love	for	him
365	went	along.	There	I	will	lie	down	beside	the	black	ship
now,	but	at	dawn	shall	make	for	the	great-hearted	
Kaukones
,	where	a	debt
owed	me	has	been	piling	up,	it	is	not	a	new	thing
nor	a	small	one.	You,	since	this	young	man	has	come	to	your	household,
give	him	conveyance	with	your	son	by	chariot,	and	give	him
370	those	horses	that	are	best	for	strength	and	the	lightest	runners.’
So	speaking,	gray-eyed	Athene	went	away	in	the	likeness
of	a	vulture,	and	amazement	seized	on	all	the	Achaians,
and	the	old	man	was	amazed	at	what	his	eyes	saw.	He	took
as	Telemachos	stays	with	Nestor
Telemachos	by	the	hand	and	spoke	a	word	to	him	and	named	him:
375	‘Dear	friend,	I	have	no	thought	that	you	will	turn	out	mean	and	cowardly
if,	when	you	are	so	young,	the	gods	go	with	you	and	guide	you
thus.	Here	was	no	other	of	those	who	have	their	homes	on	Olympos	but	the
very	daughter	of	Zeus,	most	honored	
Tritogeneia
,	who	always	among	the
Argives	favored	your	noble	father.
380	So	now,	O	queen,	be	gracious,	and	grant	me	good	reputation
for	myself	and	for	my	children	also	and	for	my	grave	wife,
and	I	will	sacrifice	you	a	yearling	cow,	with	wide	forehead,
unbroken,	one	no	man	has	ever	led	under	the	yoke	yet.
I	will	gild	both	her	horns	with	gold	and	offer	her	to	you.’
385	So	he	spoke	in	prayer,	and	Pallas	Athene	heard	him.
Now	the	Gerenian	horseman	Nestor	led	the	way	for
his	sons	and	his	sons-in-law	back	to	his	splendid	dwelling.
But	after	they	had	reached	the	glorious	dwelling	of	the	king,
they	took	their	places	in	order	on	chairs	and	along	the	benches,	390	and	as
they	came	in	the	old	man	mixed	the	wine	bowl	for	them
with	wine	sweet	to	drink	which	the	housekeeper	had	opened
in	its	eleventh	year	and	loosed	the	sealing	upon	it.
The	old	man	mixed	the	wine	in	the	bowl	and	prayed	much,	pouring	a
libation	out	to	Athene	daughter	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis.
395	When	they	had	poured	and	drunk,	each	man	as	much	as	he	wanted,	they
went	away	each	one	to	sleep	in	his	own	dwelling,
but	Nestor	the	Gerenian	horseman	gave	Telemachos
the	dear	son	of	godlike	Odysseus	a	place	to	sleep	in
upon	a	corded	bedstead	in	the	echoing	portico.
400	Next	him	was	Peisistratos	of	the	strong	ash	spear,	leader
of	men,	who	of	his	sons	in	the	palace	was	still	a	bachelor.
But	Nestor	himself	slept	in	the	inner	room	of	the	high	house,
and	at	his	side	the	lady	his	wife	served	as	bedfellow.
But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
405	then	Nestor	the	Gerenian	horseman	rose	up	from	his	bed,
and	went	outside	and	took	his	seat	upon	the	polished	stones
which	were	there	in	place	for	him	in	front	of	the	towering	doorway,	white
stones,	with	a	shine	on	them	that	glistened.	On	these	before	him	
Neleus
,	a
counselor	like	the	gods,	had	held	his	sessions,	410	but	he	had	been	beaten
down	by	his	doom	and	gone	down	to	Hades'
house,	and	now	Gerenian	Nestor,	the	Achaians'	watcher,
sat	there	holding	his	staff,	and	his	sons	coming	out	of	their	chambers
Sacrifice	to	Athene
gathered	in	a	cluster	about	him,	
Echephron
	and	
Stratios
,	
Perseus
	and
Aretos
	and	Thrasymedes	the	godlike,	415	and	sixth	was	the	hero
Peisistratos	who	came	to	join	them.
They	brought	out	godlike	Telemachos	and	seated	him	next	them,
and	Nestor	the	Gerenian	horseman	began	speaking	to	them:
‘Act	quickly	now,	dear	children,	and	do	me	this	favor,	so	that
I	may	propitiate	first	of	all	the	gods,	Athene,
420	who	came	plainly	to	me	at	our	happy	feasting	in	the	god's	honor.
Come	then,	let	one	man	go	to	the	field	for	a	cow,	so	that
she	may	come	with	all	speed,	and	let	one	of	the	oxherds	be	driving	her,	and
one	go	down	to	the	black	ship	of	great-hearted	Telemachos,
and	bring	back	all	his	companions,	leaving	only	two	beside	her,	425	and
yet	another	go	tell	the	worker	in	gold	
Laerkes
to	come,	so	that	he	can	cover	the	cow's	horns	with	gold.	You	others	stay
here	all	together	in	a	group	but	tell	the	serving
women	who	are	in	the	house	to	prepare	a	glorious	dinner,
and	set	chairs	and	firewood	in	readiness,	and	fetch	bright	water.’
430	So	he	spoke,	and	they	all	bustled	about.	The	cow	came
in	from	the	field,	and	the	companions	of	great-hearted	Telemachos	came
from	beside	their	fast	black	ship,	and	the	smith	came,	holding	in	his	hands
the	tools	for	forging	bronze,	his	handicraft's	symbols,	the	anvil	and	the
sledgehammer	and	the	well-wrought	pincers
435	with	which	he	used	to	work	the	gold,	and	Athene	also
came	to	be	at	her	rites.	Now	Nestor,	the	aged	horseman,
gave	the	smith	the	gold,	and	he	gilded	the	cow's	horns	with	it
carefully,	so	the	god	might	take	pleasure	seeing	her	offering.
Stratios	and	the	noble	Echephron	led	the	cow	by
440	the	horns,	and	Aretos	came	from	the	inner	chamber	carrying
lustral	water	in	a	flowered	bowl,	and	in	the	other	hand
scattering	barley	in	a	basket.	Steadfast	Thrasymedes
stood	by	with	the	sharp	ax	in	his	hand,	to	strike	down	the	heifer.
Perseus	held	the	dish	for	the	blood,	and	the	aged	horseman
445	Nestor	began	with	the	water	and	barley,	making	long	prayers
to	Athene,	in	dedication,	and	threw	the	head	hairs	in	the	fire.
Now	when	all	had	made	prayer	and	flung	down	the	scattering	barley,
Thrasymedes,	the	high-hearted	son	of	Nestor,	standing
close	up,	struck,	and	the	ax	chopped	its	way	through	the	tendons	450	of	the
neck	and	unstrung	the	strength	of	the	cow,	and	now	the	daughters	and
daughters-in-law	of	Nestor	and	his	grave	wife	
Eurydike
,
Departure	of	Telemachos	and	Peisistratos
eldest	of	the	daughters	of	
Klymenos
,	raised	the	outcry.
They	lifted	the	cow	from	earth	of	the	wide	ways,	and	held	her
fast	in	place,	and	Peisistratos,	leader	of	men,	slaughtered	her.
455	Now	when	the	black	blood	had	run	out,	and	the	spirit	went	from	the
bones,	they	divided	her	into	parts,	and	cut	out	the	thigh	bones	all
according	to	due	order,	and	wrapped	them	in	fat,
making	a	double	fold,	and	laid	shreds	of	flesh	upon	them.
The	old	man	burned	these	on	cleft	sticks,	and	poured	the	gleaming	460
wine	over,	while	the	young	men	with	forks	in	their	hands	stood	about	him.
But	when	they	had	burned	the	thigh	pieces	and	tasted	the	vitals,	they	cut	all
the	remainder	into	pieces	and	spitted	them,
and	roasted	all	carefully	and	took	off	the	pieces.
Meanwhile	lovely	
Polykaste
,	who	was	the	youngest	465	of	the
daughters	of	Nestor,	son	of	Neleus,	had	bathed	Telemachos.
But	when	she	had	bathed	him	and	anointed	him	sleekly	with	olive	oil,	she
threw	a	splendid	mantle	and	a	tunic	about	him,
and	he	came	out	from	the	bath	looking	like	an	immortal
and	came	and	sat	down	beside	Nestor,	shepherd	of	the	people.
470	When	they	had	roasted	and	taken	off	the	spits	the	outer
meats,	they	dined	where	they	were	sitting,	and	men	of	quality
started	up	and	poured	them	wine	in	the	golden	goblets.
But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	Nestor	the
Gerenian	horseman	began	speaking	to	them:
475	‘Come	now,	my	children,	harness	the	bright-maned	horses	under
the	yoke	for	Telemachos	so	that	he	can	get	on	with	his	journey.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	listened	well	to	him	and	obeyed	him,
and	quickly	they	harnessed	the	fast	horses	under	the	chariot,
and	the	woman	who	was	housekeeper	put	bread	and	wine	in,
480	and	meats,	such	as	kings	whom	the	gods	love	feed	on,
and	Telemachos	stepped	up	into	the	fair-wrought	chariot,
and	by	him	Peisistratos	leader	of	men,	the	son	of	Nestor,
went	up	into	the	chariot,	and	in	his	hands	took	the	reins
and	whipped	the	horses	to	run,	and	they	winged	their	way	unreluctant	485
into	the	plain,	and	left	behind	the	sheer	city	of	Pylos.
All	day	long	they	shook	the	yoke	they	wore	on	their	shoulders.
And	the	sun	set,	and	all	the	journeying	ways	were	darkened.
They	came	to	Pherai	and	reached	the	house	of	
Diokles
,	who	was	son	of
Ortilochos
,	whom	
Alpheios
	once	had	childed.
490	There	they	slept	the	night	and	he	gave	them	hospitality.
Arrival
But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
they	yoked	the	horses	again	and	mounted	the	chariots	bright	with	bronze,
and	drove	them	out	the	front	door	and	the	echoing	portico,	and	he	whipped
them	into	a	run	and	they	winged	their	way	unreluctant.
495	They	came	into	the	plain	full	of	wheat,	and	by	that	way
made	good	their	journey	as	their	fast	horses	took	this	by-way.
And	the	sun	set,	and	all	the	journeying	ways	were	darkened.
BOOK	IV
They	came	into	the	cavernous	hollow	of	Lakedaimon
and	made	their	way	to	the	house	of	glorious	
Menelaos
.
They	found	him	in	his	own	house	giving,	for	many	townsmen,
a	wedding	feast	for	his	son	and	his	stately	daughter.	The	girl	5	he	was
sending	to	the	son	of	Achilleus,	breaker	of	battalions,	for	in	Troy	land	first
he	had	nodded	his	head	to	it	and	promised	to	give	her,	and	now	the	gods
were	bringing	to	pass	their	marriage;	so	he	was	sending	her	on	her	way,
with	horses	and	chariots,
to	the	famous	city	of	the	Myrmidons,	where	Neoptolemos
10	was	lord,	and	he	brought	
Alektor's
	daughter	from	Sparta,	to	give	powerful
Megapenthes
,	his	young	grown	son	born	to	him	by	a	slave	woman;	but	the
gods	gave	no	more	children	to	
Helen
once	she	had	borne	her	first	and	only	child,	the	lovely
Hermione
,	with	the	beauty	of	
Aphrodite
	the	golden.
15	So	these	neighbors	and	townsmen	of	glorious	Menelaos
were	at	their	feasting	all	about	the	great	house	with	the	high	roof,	and
taking	their	ease,	and	among	them	stepped	an	inspired	singer	playing	his
lyre,	while	among	the	dancers	two	acrobats
led	the	measures	of	song	and	dance,	revolving	among	them.
20	These	two	now,	the	hero	Telemachos	and	the	shining
son	of	Nestor	in	the	forecourt,	themselves	and	their	horses,
stood,	while	powerful	
Eteoneus
,	who	was	the	active	henchman	of	glorious
Menelaos,	came	forward	and	saw	them
and	went	with	his	message	through	the	house	to	the	shepherd	of	the	people.
Entertainment	by	Menelaos
25	He	came	and	standing	close	beside	him	addressed	him	in	winged	words:
‘Menelaos,	dear	to	Zeus,	here	are	certain	strangers,
two	men,	and	they	look	like	the	breed	of	great	Zeus.	Tell	me
then,	whether	we	should	unharness	their	fast	horses,
or	send	them	on	to	somebody	else,	who	can	entertain	them.’
30	Then,	deeply	vexed,	fair-haired	Menelaos	answered	him:
Eteoneus,	son	of	
Boëthoös
,	you	were	never	a	fool	before,	but	now	you	are
babbling	nonsense,	as	a	child
would	do.	Surely	we	two	have	eaten	much	hospitality
from	other	men	before	we	came	back	here.	May	Zeus	only
35	make	an	end	of	such	misery	hereafter.	Unharness
the	strangers'	horses	then,	and	bring	the	men	here	to	be	feasted.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	man	hurried	through	the	hall,	bestirring
the	other	active	henchmen	to	come	on	the	way	along	with	him.
They	set	free	the	sweating	horses	from	under	the	harness,
40	and	tethered	them	fast	by	the	reins	in	front	of	the	horse	mangers,	and	put
down	fodder	before	them	and	mixed	white	millet	into	it,	and	leaned	the
chariots	up	against	the	glittering	inner	walls,	and	led	the	men	inside	the
divine	house.	These	marveled
as	they	admired	the	palace	of	the	king	whom	Zeus	loved,
45	for	as	the	shining	of	the	sun	or	the	moon	was	the	shining
all	through	this	high-roofed	house	of	glorious	Menelaos.
When	with	their	eyes	they	had	had	their	pleasure	in	admiration,	they
stepped	into	the	bathtubs	smooth-polished	and	bathed	there.
Then	when	the	maids	had	bathed	them	and	anointed	them	with	oil,	50	and
put	cloaks	of	thick	fleece	and	tunics	upon	them,	they	went	and	sat	on
chairs	beside	Menelaos	the	son	of	Atreus.
A	maidservant	brought	water	for	them	and	poured	it	from	a	splendid	and
golden	pitcher,	holding	it	above	a	silver	basin
for	them	to	wash,	and	she	pulled	a	polished	table	before	them.
55	A	grave	housekeeper	brought	in	the	bread	and	served	it	to	them,	adding
many	good	things	to	it,	generous	with	her	provisions,
while	a	carver	lifted	platters	of	all	kinds	of	meat	and	set	them	in	front	of
them,	and	placed	beside	them	the	golden	goblets.
Then	in	greeting	fair-haired	Menelaos	said	to	them:
60	‘Help	yourselves	to	the	food	and	welcome,	and	then	afterward,	when	you
have	tasted	dinner,	we	shall	ask	you	who	among
men	you	are,	for	the	stock	of	your	parents	can	be	no	lost	one,	but	you	are
of	the	race	of	men	who	are	kings,	whom	Zeus	sustains,
who	remembers	his	wanderings
who	bear	scepters;	no	mean	men	could	have	sons	such	as	you	are.’
65	So	he	spoke,	and	taking	in	his	hands	the	fat	beef	loin
which	had	been	given	as	his	choice	portion,	he	set	it	before	them.
They	put	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	then
Telemachos	talked	to	the	son	of	Nestor,	leaning
70	his	head	close	to	his,	so	that	none	of	the	others	might	hear	him:	‘Son	of
Nestor,	you	who	delight	my	heart,	only	look	at
the	gleaming	of	the	bronze	all	through	these	echoing	mansions,	and	the
gleaming	of	gold	and	amber,	of	silver	and	of	ivory.
The	court	of	Zeus	on	Olympos	must	be	like	this	on	the	inside,	75	such
abundance	of	everything.	Wonder	takes	me	as	I	look	on	it.’
Menelaos	of	the	fair	hair	overheard	him	speaking,
and	now	he	spoke	to	both	of	them	and	addressed	them	in	winged	words:
‘Dear	children,	there	is	no	mortal	who	could	rival	Zeus,	seeing	that	his
mansions	are	immortal	and	his	possessions.	There	may	be	80	some	man
who	could	rival	me	for	property,	or	there	may	be
none.	Much	did	I	suffer	and	wandered	much	before	bringing
all	this	home	in	my	ships	when	I	came	back	in	the	eighth	year.
I	wandered	to	
Cyprus
	and	
Phoenicia
,	to	the	Egyptians,	I	reached	the
Aithiopians,	
Eremboi
,	Sidonians,	85	and	
Libya
	where	the	rams	grow	their
horns	quickly.	Three	times	in	the	fulfillment	of	a	year	their	sheepflocks
give	birth,
and	there	no	lord	would	ever	go	wanting,	nor	would	his	shepherd,	for
cheese	or	meat,	nor	for	the	sweet	milk	either,	but	always	the	sheep	yield	a
continuous	supply	for	their	sucklings.
90	But	while	I	was	wandering	those	parts	and	bringing	together
much	property,	meanwhile	another	man	killed	my	brother
secretly,	by	surprise	and	by	his	cursed	wife's	treachery.
So	it	is	with	no	pleasure	I	am	lord	over	all	these	possessions.
You	will	have	heard	all	this	from	your	fathers,	whoever	your	fathers	95	are,
for	I	have	suffered	much,	and	destroyed	a	household
that	was	very	strongly	settled	and	held	many	goods	within	it.
I	wish	I	lived	in	my	house	with	only	a	third	part	of	all
these	goods,	and	that	the	men	were	alive	who	died	in	those	days	in	wide
Troy	land	far	away	from	horse-pasturing	Argos.
100	Still	and	again	lamenting	all	these	men	and	sorrowing
many	a	time	when	I	am	sitting	here	in	our	palace
I	will	indulge	my	heart	in	sorrow,	and	then	another	time
Enter	Helen
give	over,	for	surfeit	of	gloomy	lamentation	comes	quickly.
But	for	none	of	all	these,	sorry	as	I	am,	do	I	grieve	so	much	105	as	for	one,
who	makes	hateful	for	me	my	food	and	my	sleep,	when	I	remember,	since
no	one	of	the	Achaians	labored	as	much
as	Odysseus	labored	and	achieved,	and	for	him	the	end	was
grief	for	him,	and	for	me	a	sorrow	that	is	never	forgotten
for	his	sake,	how	he	is	gone	so	long,	and	we	knew	nothing
110	of	whether	he	is	alive	or	dead.	The	aged	Laertes
and	temperate	Penelope	must	surely	be	grieving	for	him,
with	Telemachos	whom	he	left	behind	in	his	house,	a	young	child.’
He	spoke,	and	stirred	in	the	other	the	longing	to	weep	for	his	father,
and	the	tears	fell	from	his	eyes	to	the	ground	when	he	heard	his	father's	115
name,	holding	with	both	hands	the	robe	that	was	stained	with	purple	up
before	his	eyes.	And	Menelaos	perceived	it,
and	now	he	pondered	two	ways	within,	in	mind	and	in	spirit
whether	he	would	leave	it	to	him	to	name	his	father,
or	whether	he	should	speak	first	and	ask	and	inquire	about	everything.
120	While	he	was	pondering	these	things	in	his	heart	and	his	spirit,	Helen
came	out	of	her	fragrant	high-roofed	bedchamber,
looking	like	Artemis	of	the	golden	distaff.	
Adreste
followed	and	set	the	well-made	chair	in	place	for	her,
and	the	coverlet	of	soft	wool	was	carried	in	by	
Alkippe
,	125	and	
Phylo
brought	the	silver	workbasket	which	had	been	given	by	
Alkandre
,	the	wife
of	Polybos,	who	lived	in	Egyptian	
Thebes
,	where	the	greatest	number	of
goods	are	stored	in	the	houses.
Polybos	himself	gave	Menelaos	two	silver	bathtubs,
and	a	pair	of	tripods,	and	ten	talents	of	gold,	and	apart	from	130	these	his
wife	gave	her	own	beautiful	gifts	to	Helen.
She	gave	her	a	golden	distaff	and	a	basket,	silver,
with	wheels	underneath,	and	the	edges	were	done	in	gold.	Phylo,	her
maidservant,	now	brought	it	in	and	set	it	beside	her
full	of	yarn	that	had	been	prepared	for	spinning.	The	distaff	135	with	the
dark-colored	wool	was	laid	over	the	basket.	Helen
seated	herself	on	the	chair,	and	under	her	feet	was	a	footstool.
At	once	she	spoke	to	her	husband	and	questioned	him	about	everything:
‘Do	we	know,	Menelaos	beloved	of	Zeus,	who	these	men
announce	themselves	as	being,	who	have	come	into	our	house	now?
140	Shall	I	be	wrong,	or	am	I	speaking	the	truth?	My	heart	tells	me	to	speak,
for	I	think	I	never	saw	such	a	likeness,	neither
Telemachos	is	identified
in	man	nor	woman,	and	wonder	takes	me	as	I	look	on	him,
as	this	man	has	a	likeness	to	the	son	of	great-hearted	Odysseus,
Telemachos,	who	was	left	behind	in	his	house,	a	young	child
145	by	that	man	when,	for	the	sake	of	shameless	me,	the	Achaians	went
beneath	Troy,	their	hearts	intent	upon	reckless	warfare.’
Then	in	answer	fair-haired	Menelaos	said	to	her:
‘I	also	see	it	thus,	my	wife,	the	way	you	compare	them,
for	Odysseus'	feet	were	like	this	man's,	his	hands	were	like	this,	150	and
the	glances	of	his	eyes	and	his	head	and	the	hair	growing.
Now	too	I	was	remembering	things	about	Odysseus
and	spoke	of	him,	what	misery	he	had	in	his	hard	work
for	me,	and	he	let	fall	a	heavy	tear	from	under	his	eyelids,
holding	before	his	eyes	the	robe	that	was	stained	with	purple.’
155	Now	Peisistratos	son	of	Nestor	spoke	up	before	him:
‘Great	Menelaos,	son	of	Atreus,	leader	of	the	people,
this	is	in	truth	the	son	of	that	man,	just	as	you	are	saying;	but	he	is	modest,
and	his	spirit	would	be	shocked	at	the	thought	of	coming	here	and
beginning	a	show	of	reckless	language
160	in	front	of	you,	for	we	both	delight	in	your	voice,	as	if	a	god	were
speaking.	The	Gerenian	horseman	Nestor	sent	me
to	go	along	with	him	and	escort	him.	He	longed	to	see	you
so	that	you	could	advise	him	somewhat,	for	word	or	action.
For	a	child	endures	many	griefs	in	his	house	when	his	father
165	is	gone	away,	and	no	others	are	there	to	help	him,	as	now
Telemachos'	father	is	gone	away,	and	there	are	no	others
who	can	defend	him	against	the	evil	that	is	in	his	country.’
Then	in	answer	fair-haired	Menelaos	said	to	him:
‘See	now,	this	is	the	son	of	a	man	greatly	beloved	who	has	come	now	170
into	my	house,	one	who	for	my	sake	endured	many	trials,
and	I	thought	he	would	come,	and	I	would	love	him	beyond	all	other
Argives,	if	only	Olympian	Zeus	of	the	wide	brows	granted
both	of	us	to	come	home	across	the	sea	in	our	fast	ships.
I	would	have	settled	a	city	in	Argos	for	him,	and	made	him
175	a	home,	bringing	him	from	Ithaka	with	all	his	possessions,
his	son,	all	his	people.	I	would	have	emptied	one	city	for	him	out	of	those
that	are	settled	round	about	and	under	my	lordship.
And,	both	here,	we	would	have	seen	much	of	each	other;	nothing	would
then	have	separated	us	two	in	our	friendship	and	pleasure,	180	until	the
darkening	cloud	of	death	had	shrouded	us	over.
Memories	of	Troy
All	this	must	be	what	the	very	god	himself	begrudged	him,
who	made	only	him	an	unhappy	man,	without	a	homecoming.’
He	spoke,	and	started	in	all	of	them	the	desire	for	weeping.
Helen	of	Argos,	daughter	of	Zeus,	wept,	so	too	Telemachos
185	wept,	as	did	Menelaos	the	son	of	Atreus,	nor	did
Nestor's	son,	Peisistratos,	have	eyes	altogether	tearless,
for	he	was	thinking	in	his	heart	of	stately	Antilochos,
one	whom	the	glorious	son	of	the	shining	Dawn	had	cut	down.
It	was	of	him	he	thought	as	he	addressed	them	in	winged	words:	190	‘Son
of	Atreus,	the	aged	Nestor	used	to	say	you	were
thoughtful,	surpassing	other	men,	when	we	spoke	about	you
there	in	his	own	palace,	and	when	we	questioned	each	other.
So	now,	if	it	may	be,	would	you	do	me	a	favor?	For	my	part
I	have	no	joy	in	tears	after	dinnertime.	There	will	always
195	be	a	new	dawn	tomorrow.	Yet	I	can	have	no	objection
to	tears	for	any	mortal	who	dies	and	goes	to	his	destiny.
And	this	is	the	only	consolation	we	wretched	mortals
can	give,	to	cut	our	hair	and	let	the	tears	roll	down	our	faces.
For	I	myself	had	a	brother	who	died,	he	was	not	the	meanest
200	of	the	Argives,	and	you	would	have	known	him,	but	I	for	my	part	never
met	nor	saw	him.	They	say	he	surpassed	all	others:
Antilochos:	surpassingly	swift	of	foot,	and	a	fighter.’
Then	in	answer	fair-haired	Menelaos	said	to	him:
‘Dear	friend,	since	you	have	said	all	that	a	man	who	is	thoughtful	205
could	say	or	do,	even	one	who	was	older	than	you	are—	why,	this	is	the
way	your	father	is,	so	you	too	speak	thoughtfully.
Easily	recognized	is	the	line	of	that	man,	for	whom	Kronos'
son	weaves	good	fortune	in	his	marrying	and	begetting,
as	now	he	has	given	to	Nestor,	all	his	days,	for	himself
210	to	grow	old	prosperously	in	his	own	palace,	and	also
that	his	sons	should	be	clever	and	excellent	in	the	spear's	work.
Now	we	shall	let	the	weeping	be,	that	came	to	us	just	now,
and	let	us	think	again	about	dinner,	let	someone	pour	us
water	for	our	hands,	and	there	will	be	time	for	words	tomorrow	215	at
dawn,	for	Telemachos	and	me,	to	talk	with	each	other.’
He	spoke,	and	
Asphalion
,	who	was	the	active	henchman	of	glorious
Menelaos,	poured	water	for	them	to	wash	with.
They	put	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
Now	Helen,	who	was	descended	of	Zeus,	thought	of	the	next	thing.
and	exploits	of	Odysseus
220	Into	the	wine	of	which	they	were	drinking	she	cast	a	medicine	of
heartsease,	free	of	gall,	to	make	one	forget	all	sorrows,
and	whoever	had	drunk	it	down	once	it	had	been	mixed	in	the	wine	bowl,
for	the	day	that	he	drank	it	would	have	no	tear	roll	down	his	face,	not	if	his
mother	died	and	his	father	died,	not	if	men
225	murdered	a	brother	or	a	beloved	son	in	his	presence
with	the	bronze,	and	he	with	his	own	eyes	saw	it.	Such	were
the	subtle	medicines	Zeus'	daughter	had	in	her	possessions,
good	things,	and	given	to	her	by	the	wife	of	
Thon
,	
Polydamna
of	Egypt,	where	the	fertile	earth	produces	the	greatest	number	230	of
medicines,	many	good	in	mixture,	many	malignant,
and	every	man	is	a	doctor	there	and	more	understanding
than	men	elsewhere.	These	people	are	of	the	race	of	
Paiëon
.
Now	when	she	had	put	the	medicine	in,	and	told	them	to	pour	it,	taking	up
the	story	again	she	began	to	speak	to	them:
235	‘Son	of	Atreus,	dear	to	Zeus,	Menelaos:	and	you	who
are	here,	children	of	noble	fathers;	yet	divine	Zeus	sometimes	gives	out
good,	or	sometimes	evil;	he	can	do	anything.
Sit	here	now	in	the	palace	and	take	your	dinner	and	listen
to	me	and	be	entertained.	What	I	will	tell	you	is	plausible.
240	I	could	not	tell	you	all	the	number	nor	could	I	name	them,
all	that	make	up	the	exploits	of	enduring	Odysseus,
but	here	is	a	task	such	as	that	strong	man	endured	and	accomplished	in	the
Trojan	country	where	you	Achaians	suffered	miseries.
He	flagellated	himself	with	degrading	strokes,	then	threw	on
245	a	worthless	sheet	about	his	shoulders.	He	looked	like	a	servant.
So	he	crept	into	the	wide-wayed	city	of	the	men	he	was	fighting,	disguising
himself	in	the	likeness	of	somebody	else,	a	beggar,	one	who	was	unlike
himself	beside	the	ships	of	the	Achaians,
but	in	his	likeness	crept	into	the	Trojans'	city,	and	they	all	250	were	taken
in.	I	alone	recognized	him	even	in	this	form,
and	I	questioned	him,	but	he	in	his	craftiness	eluded	me;
but	after	I	had	bathed	him	and	anointed	him	with	olive	oil
and	put	some	clothing	upon	him,	after	I	had	sworn	a	great	oath	not	to
disclose	before	the	Trojans	that	this	was	Odysseus
255	until	he	had	made	his	way	back	to	the	fast	ships	and	the	shelters,	then	at
last	he	told	me	all	the	purpose	of	the	Achaians,
and	after	striking	many	Trojans	down	with	the	thin	bronze
edge,	he	went	back	to	the	Argives	and	brought	back	much	information.
Memories	of	Odysseus
The	rest	of	the	Trojan	women	cried	out	shrill,	but	my	heart
260	was	happy,	my	heart	had	changed	by	now	and	was	for	going	back	home
again,	and	I	grieved	for	the	madness	that	Aphrodite
bestowed	when	she	led	me	there	away	from	my	own	dear	country,
forsaking	my	own	daughter,	my	bedchamber,	and	my	husband,
a	man	who	lacked	no	endowment	either	of	brains	or	beauty.’
265	Then	in	answer	fair-haired	Menelaos	said	to	her:
‘Yes,	my	wife,	all	this	that	you	said	is	fair	and	orderly.
In	my	time	I	have	studied	the	wit	and	counsel	of	many
men	who	were	heroes,	and	I	have	been	over	much	of	the	world,	yet
nowhere	have	I	seen	with	my	own	eyes	anyone	like	him,
270	nor	known	an	inward	heart	like	the	heart	of	enduring	Odysseus.
Here	is	the	way	that	strong	man	acted	and	the	way	he	endured
action,	inside	the	wooden	horse,	where	we	who	were	greatest
of	the	Argives	all	were	sitting	and	bringing	death	and	destruction	to	the
Trojans.	Then	you	came	there,	Helen;	you	will	have	been	moved	by	275
some	divine	spirit	who	wished	to	grant	glory	to	the	Trojans,	and
Deïphobos
,	a	godlike	man,	was	with	you	when	you	came.
Three	times	you	walked	around	the	hollow	ambush,	feeling	it,
and	you	called	out,	naming	them	by	name,	to	the	best	of	the	Danaans,	and
made	your	voice	sound	like	the	voice	of	the	wife	of	each	of	the	Argives.
280	Now	I	myself	and	the	son	of	Tydeus	and	great	Odysseus
were	sitting	there	in	the	middle	of	them	and	we	heard	you	crying	aloud,
and	Diomedes	and	I	started	up,	both	minded
to	go	outside,	or	else	to	answer	your	voice	from	inside,
but	Odysseus	pulled	us	back	and	held	us,	for	all	our	eagerness.
285	Then	all	the	other	sons	of	the	Achaians	were	silent:
there	was	only	one,	it	was	
Antiklos
,	who	was	ready	to	answer,	but
Odysseus,	brutally	squeezing	his	mouth	in	the	clutch	of	his	powerful
hands,	held	him,	and	so	saved	the	lives	of	all	the	Achaians
until	such	time	as	Pallas	Athene	led	you	off	from	us.’
290	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Great	Menelaos,	son	of	Atreus,	leader	of	the	people:
so	much	the	worse;	for	none	of	all	this	kept	dismal	destruction	from	him,
not	even	if	he	had	a	heart	of	iron	within	him.
But	come,	take	us	away	to	our	beds,	so	that	at	last	now
295	we	can	go	to	bed	and	enjoy	the	pleasure	of	sweet	sleep.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Helen	of	Argos	told	her	serving	maids
Next	morning,	Telemachos	asks	about	him
to	make	up	beds	in	the	porch's	shelter	and	to	lay	upon	them
fine	underbedding	of	purple,	and	spread	blankets	above	it
and	fleecy	robes	to	be	an	over-all	covering.	The	maidservants	300	went
forth	from	the	main	house,	and	in	their	hands	held	torches,	and	they	made
the	beds.	The	guests	were	led	outside	by	a	herald.
So	the	hero	Telemachos	and	the	glorious	son	of	Nestor
slept	in	the	place	outside	the	house	in	the	porch's	shelter,
but	the	son	of	Atreus	slept	in	the	inner	room	of	the	high	house,	305	and	by
him	lay	Helen	of	the	light	robes,	shining	among	women.
Now	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
Menelaos	of	the	great	war	cry	rose	from	where	he	was	sleeping	and	put	on
his	clothes,	and	slung	a	sharp	sword	over	his	shoulder.
Underneath	his	shining	feet	he	bound	the	fair	sandals
310	and	went	on	his	way	from	the	chamber,	like	a	god	in	presence,	and	sat
down	by	Telemachos	and	spoke	to	him	and	named	him:
‘What	is	the	need	that	has	brought	you	here,	O	hero	Telemachos,	to	shining
Lakedaimon	over	the	sea's	wide	ridges?
A	public	or	a	private	matter?	Tell	me	this	truly.’
315	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Great	Menelaos,	son	of	Atreus,	leader	of	the	people,
I	have	come	to	see	if	you	could	tell	me	some	news	of	my	father,	for	my
home	is	being	eaten	away,	the	rich	fields	are	ruined,
and	the	house	is	full	of	hateful	men,	who	now	forever
320	slaughter	my	crowding	sheep	and	lumbering	horn-curved	cattle,	these
suitors	of	my	mother,	overbearing	in	their	rapacity.
That	is	why	I	come	to	your	knees	now,	in	case	you	might	wish
to	tell	me	of	his	dismal	destruction,	whether	you	saw	it
perhaps	with	your	own	eyes,	or	heard	the	tale	from	another
325	who	wandered	too.	His	mother	bore	this	man	to	be	wretched.
Do	not	soften	it	because	you	pity	me	and	are	sorry
for	me,	but	fairly	tell	me	all	that	your	eyes	have	witnessed.
I	implore	you,	if	ever	noble	Odysseus,	my	father,
undertook	any	kind	of	word	or	work	and	fulfilled	it
330	for	you,	in	the	land	of	the	Trojans	where	all	you	Achaians	suffered,	tell
me	these	things	from	your	memory.	And	tell	me	the	whole	truth.’
Then	deeply	angered	fair-haired	Menelaos	said	to	him:
‘Oh,	for	shame,	it	was	in	the	bed	of	a	bold	and	strong	man
they	wished	to	lie,	they	themselves	being	all	unwarlike.
335	As	when	a	doe	has	brought	her	fawns	to	the	lair	of	a	lion
The	wanderings	of	Menelaos,
and	put	them	there	to	sleep,	they	are	newborn	and	still	suckling,	then
wanders	out	into	the	foothills	and	the	grassy	corners,
grazing	there,	but	now	the	lion	comes	back	to	his	own	lair
and	visits	a	shameful	destruction	on	both	mother	and	children;	340	so
Odysseus	will	visit	shameful	destruction	on	these	men.
O	father	Zeus	and	Athene	and	Apollo,	I	wish	that
as	he	was	when	upon	a	time	in	strong-founded	
Lesbos
he	stood	up	and	wrestled	
Philomeleides
	from	a	challenge	and	threw	him
strongly,	so	delighting	all	the	Achaians,
345	I	wish	that	such	an	Odysseus	would	come	now	among	the	suitors.
They	all	would	find	death	was	quick	and	marriage	a	painful	matter.
But	for	what	you	entreat	me	for	and	ask	me	about,	I	will	not
turn	away	from	the	tale	and	speak	idly,	nor	will	I	deceive	you,	but	of	what
the	ever-truthful	Old	Man	of	the	Sea	told	me
350	I	will	tell	all	without	concealment,	and	hold	back	nothing.
‘The	gods	held	me	still	in	Egypt	when	I	was	eager	to	come	back
here,	for	I	had	not	rendered	complete	hecatombs	to	them.
The	gods	have	always	desired	that	their	orders	should	be	listened	to.
There	is	an	island	there	in	the	heavy	wash	of	the	open
355	sea,	in	front	of	Egypt,	and	they	call	it	
Pharos
,	as	far	out	as	the	distance	a
hollow	ship	can	make	in	a	whole	day's	sailing	when	a	sharp	and	following
wind	is	blowing	it	onward.
And	there	is	a	harbor	there	with	good	anchorage,	whence	they	put	forth
their	balanced	ships	to	sea,	after	they	have	drawn	dark	water.
360	There	the	gods	held	me	twenty	days,	nor	did	the	sea	winds
ever	appear	and	blow	across	the	salt	water,	such	winds
as	act	to	send	ships	sailing	over	the	sea's	wide	ridges.
And	now	the	food	would	all	have	been	gone,	and	the	men's	strength	with	it,
if	one	of	the	gods	had	not	been	sorry	for	me,	and	shown	mercy,	365
Eidothea
,	daughter	to	mighty	
Proteus
,	the	Old	Man	of	the	Sea,	for	it	was
her	heart	that	I	moved	mostly
when	she	met	me	wandering	by	myself	without	my	companions.
For	always	ranging	about	the	island	they	would	go	fishing
with	crooked	fishhooks,	and	always	the	hunger	oppressed	their	bellies.
370	She	came	and	stood	close	beside	me	and	spoke	a	word	and	addressed	me:
“Are	you	so	simple	then,	O	stranger,	and	flimsy-minded,
or	are	you	willingly	giving	up,	and	enjoying	your	hardships?
See,	you	are	held	so	long	on	the	island,	and	can	find	no	way
stormbound	off	Egypt
out	of	it,	while	the	heart	in	your	companions	diminishes.”
375	So	she	spoke,	and	I	in	turn	spoke	up	and	made	answer:
“So	I	will	tell,	whoever	you	may	be	of	the	goddesses,
that	I	am	not	detained	of	my	own	free	will,	but	it	must	be
I	have	offended	the	immortals	who	hold	wide	heaven.
But	do	you	then	tell	me,	for	the	gods	know	everything,	which	one	380	of
the	immortals	hampers	me	here	and	keeps	me	from	my	journey	and	tell	me
how	to	make	my	way	home	on	the	sea	where	the	fish	swarm.”
So	I	spoke,	and	she,	shining	among	the	goddesses,	answered:
“See,	I	will	accurately	answer	all	that	you	ask	me.
The	ever	truthful	Old	Man	of	the	Sea	ranges	in	these	parts.
385	This	is	the	Egyptian,	immortal	Proteus,	and	he	knows
all	the	depths	of	the	sea.	He	is	Poseidon's	underthegn.
And	they	say	also	he	is	my	father,	that	he	begot	me.
If	somehow	you	could	lie	in	ambush	and	catch	hold	of	him,
he	could	tell	you	the	way	to	go,	the	stages	of	your	journey,
390	and	tell	you	how	to	make	your	way	home	on	the	sea	where	the	fish
swarm.
And	he	could	tell	you	too,	illustrious	one,	if	you	wish	it,
what	evil	and	what	good	has	been	done	in	your	palace
while	you	have	been	gone	away	on	your	long	and	arduous	voyage.”
So	she	spoke,	but	then	I	answered	her	and	said	to	her:
395	“Show	me	the	way	to	lie	in	wait	for	this	divine	ancient,
for	fear	he	may	somehow	see	me	first	and	be	warned	and	avoid	me.
A	god	is	difficult	for	a	mortal	man	to	master.”
So	I	spoke,	and	she,	shining	among	goddesses,	answered:
“See,	I	will	accurately	answer	all	that	you	ask	me.
400	At	the	time	when	the	sun	has	gone	up	to	bestride	the	middle	of	heaven,
then	the	ever-truthful	Old	Man	of	the	Sea	will	come	out	of	the	water	under
the	blast	of	the	West	Wind,	circled	in	a	shudder	of	darkening	water,	and
when	he	comes	out	he	will	sleep,	under	hollow	caverns,	and	around	him
seals,	those	darlings	of	the	sea's	lovely	lady,	405	sleep	in	a	huddle,	after
they	have	emerged	from	the	gray	sea,	giving	off	the	sour	smell	that	comes
from	the	deep	salt	water.
There	I	will	take	you	myself	when	dawn	shows	and	arrange	you
orderly	in	your	ambush;	you	must	choose	from	your	companions
those	three	who	are	your	best	beside	your	strong-benched	vessels.
410	Now	I	will	tell	you	all	the	devious	ways	of	this	old	man.
First	of	all	he	will	go	among	his	seals	and	count	them,
but	after	he	has	reviewed	them	all	and	noted	their	number,
Capture	of
he	will	lie	down	in	their	midst,	like	a	herdsman	among	his	sheepflocks.
Next,	as	soon	as	you	see	that	he	is	asleep,	that	will	be
415	the	time	for	all	of	you	to	use	your	strength	and	your	vigor,	and	hold	him
there	while	he	strives	and	struggles	hard	to	escape	you.
And	he	will	try	you	by	taking	the	form	of	all	creatures	that	come	forth	and
move	on	the	earth,	he	will	be	water	and	magical	fire.
You	must	hold	stiffly	on	to	him	and	squeeze	him	the	harder.
420	But	when	at	last	he	himself,	speaking	in	words,	questions	you,	being	now
in	the	same	form	he	was	in	when	you	saw	him	sleeping,	then,	hero,	you
must	give	over	your	force	and	let	the	old	man	go	free,	and	ask	him	which
one	of	the	gods	is	angry	with	you,	and	ask	him	how	to	make	your	way
home	on	the	sea	where	the	fish	swarm.”
425	So	she	spoke,	and	dived	back	into	the	surf	of	the	water.
Then	I	went	back	again	to	our	ships	where	they	were	stationed	along	the
sand,	but	my	heart	was	a	storm	in	me	as	I	went.	Now	when	I	had	come
back	to	where	my	ship	lay	by	the	seaside,
we	made	ready	our	dinner,	and	the	immortal	night	came	over,
430	and	then	we	lay	down	to	sleep	along	the	break	of	the	sea	beach.
But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
then	I	made	my	way	along	the	beach	of	the	wide-wayed
sea,	praying	much	to	the	gods,	and	I	took	along	with	me
those	three	companions	I	trusted	most	for	any	adventure.
435	‘Meanwhile	she	had	dived	down	into	the	sea's	great	cavern
and	brought	back	the	skins	of	four	seals	out	of	the	water.
All	were	newly	skinned.	She	was	planning	a	trick	on	her	father.
And	hollowing	out	four	beds	in	the	sand	of	the	sea,	she	sat	there	waiting
for	us,	and	we	came	close	up	to	her.	Thereupon
440	she	bedded	us	down	in	order,	and	spread	a	skin	over	each	man.
That	was	a	most	awful	ambush,	for	the	pernicious
smell	of	those	seals,	bred	in	the	salt	water,	oppressed	us	terribly.
Who	would	want	to	lie	down	to	sleep	by	a	sea-bred	monster?
But	she	herself	came	to	our	rescue	and	devised	a	great	help.
445	She	brought	ambrosia,	and	put	it	under	the	nose	of	each	man,	and	it
smelled	very	sweet,	and	did	away	with	the	stench	of	the	monster.
All	that	morning	we	waited	there,	with	enduring	spirit,
and	the	seals	came	crowding	out	of	the	sea,	and	when	they	came	out	they
lay	down	to	sleep	in	order	along	the	break	of	the	sea	beach.
450	At	noon	the	Old	Man	came	out	of	the	sea	and	found	his	well-fed
the	prophetic	Old	Man	of	the	Sea
seals,	and	went	about	to	them	all,	and	counted	their	number,
and	we	were	among	the	first	he	counted;	he	had	no	idea
of	any	treachery.	Then	he	too	lay	down	among	us.
We	with	a	cry	sprang	up	and	rushed	upon	him,	locking	him
455	in	our	arms,	but	the	Old	Man	did	not	forget	the	subtlety
of	his	arts.	First	he	turned	into	a	great	bearded	lion,
and	then	to	a	serpent,	then	to	a	leopard,	then	to	a	great	boar,	and	he	turned
into	fluid	water,	to	a	tree	with	towering	branches,	but	we	held	stiffly	on	to
him	with	enduring	spirit.
460	But	when	the	Old	Man	versed	in	devious	ways	grew	weary
of	all	this,	he	spoke	to	me	in	words	and	questioned	me:
“Which	of	the	gods	now,	son	of	Atreus,	has	been	advising	you
to	capture	me	from	ambush	against	my	will.	What	do	you	want?”
So	he	spoke,	and	I	in	turn	spoke	up	and	made	answer:
465	“You	know,	Old	Man.	Why	try	to	put	me	off	with	your	answer?
See,	I	am	held	so	long	on	the	island,	and	can	find	no	way
out	of	it,	while	the	inward	heart	in	me	diminishes.
Do	you	then	tell	me,	for	the	gods	know	everything,	which	one
of	the	immortals	hampers	me	here	and	keeps	me	from	my	journey,	470	and
tell	me	how	to	make	my	way	home	on	the	sea	where	the	fish	swarm.”
So	I	spoke,	and	he	in	turn	spoke	up	and	made	answer:
“But	you	should	have	made	grand	sacrifices	to	Zeus	and	the	other
immortal	gods,	and	so	gone	on	board,	so	most	quickly
to	reach	your	own	country,	sailing	over	the	wine-blue	water.
475	It	is	not	your	destiny	now	to	see	your	own	people	and	come	back	to	your
strong-founded	house	and	to	the	land	of	your	fathers,	until	you	have	gone
back	once	again	to	the	water	of	Egypt,
the	sky-fallen	river,	and	there	have	accomplished	holy	hecatombs	in	honor
of	all	the	immortal	gods	who	hold	wide	heaven.
480	Then	the	gods	will	grant	you	that	journey	that	you	so	long	for.”
So	he	spoke,	and	the	inward	heart	in	me	was	broken
because	he	ordered	me	to	go	back	on	the	misty	surface
of	the	water	to	Egypt	again,	a	long	way	and	a	hard	one,
but	even	so	I	answered	him	in	words	and	said	to	him:
485	“All	these	things	I	will	do,	Old	Man,	in	the	way	you	tell	me.
But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
Did	all	those	Achaians	Nestor	and	I	left	behind	when	we	went
sailing	from	Troy	come	back	in	their	ships,	without	injury,
or	did	any	of	them	die	by	a	dismal	death	on	shipboard
The	Old	Man	tells	about	Agamemnon
490	or	in	the	arms	of	his	friends	after	he	had	wound	up	the	fighting?”
So	I	spoke,	and	he	in	turn	spoke	up	and	made	answer:
“Son	of	Atreus,	why	did	you	ask	me	that?	You	should	not
learn	it,	nor	know	what	my	mind	knows,	and	I	think	you	will	not	be	free	of
tears	for	long,	once	you	have	heard	the	whole	story.
495	There	were	many	of	these	men	who	were	lost,	and	many	left	over,	but	two
alone	who	were	leaders	of	the	bronze-armored	Achaians	died	on	the	way
home.	You	yourself	were	there	at	the	fighting.
And	there	is	one	who	is	being	held	alive	on	the	wide	sea
somewhere.	Aias	was	lost,	and	his	long-oared	vessels	with	him.
500	First	of	all	Poseidon	drove	him	against	the	great	rocks
of	
Gyrai
,	and	yet	he	saved	him	out	of	the	water,	and	Aias	would	have
escaped	his	doom,	though	Athene	hated	him,	had	he	not	gone	wildly	mad
and	tossed	out	a	word	of	defiance;	for	he	said	that	in	despite	of	the	gods	he
escaped	the	great	gulf	505	of	the	sea,	and	Poseidon	heard	him,	loudly
vaunting,
and	at	once	with	his	ponderous	hands	catching	up	the	trident
he	drove	it	against	the	Gyrean	rock,	and	split	a	piece	off	it,	and	part	of	it
stayed	where	it	was,	but	a	splinter	crashed	in	the	water,	and	this	was	where
Aias	had	been	perched	when	he	raved	so	madly.
510	It	carried	him	down	to	the	depths	of	the	endless	and	tossing	main	sea.
So	Aias	died,	when	he	had	swallowed	down	the	salt	water.
Your	brother	somehow	got	away	and	escaped	the	death	spirits
with	his	hollow	ships.	It	was	the	lady	
Hera
	who	saved	him.
But	now	as	he	had	come	close	to	the	point	of	making	the	sheer	peak	515
Maleia,	then	the	stormwinds	caught	him	away	and	carried	him,	516
groaning	heavily,	out	on	the	open	sea	where	the	fish	swarm.
519	But	since	even	from	out	there	an	easy	homecoming	was	manifest	520	for
him,	the	gods	twisted	the	wind	back,	and	they	made	the	homeland	517	at
the	uttermost	edge	of	his	estate,	where	before	now	
Thyestes
518	had	made	his	home,	but	now	Aigisthos	son	of	Thyestes
521	lived.	Agamemnon	stepped	rejoicing	on	the	soil	of	his	country	and
stroked	the	ground	with	his	hand	and	kissed	it,	and	his	thronging	hot	tears
streamed	down,	so	dear	to	him	was	the	sight	of	his	country.
But	a	watchman	saw	him	from	his	lookout,	a	man	whom	Aigisthos	525	had
treacherously	taken	and	stationed	there,	and	promised	him	two	talents	of
gold	as	pay.	For	a	year	he	had	been	watching
so	Agamemnon	would	not	go	by	unnoticed	and	mindful
of	his	furious	valor.	The	man	ran	to	the	house	of	the	war	lord
and	of	Odysseus	with	Kalypso
with	his	news,	and	at	once	Aigisthos	devised	a	treacherous	stratagem.
530	Choosing	out	the	twenty	best	fighting	men	in	the	district,
he	set	an	ambush,	and	beside	it	had	them	arrange	a	festival,
and	went	down	to	welcome	Agamemnon,	shepherd	of	the	people,
with	horses	and	chariots,	and	with	shameful	thoughts	in	his	mind,	then	led
him	in	all	unsuspicious	of	death,	and	feasted	him
535	and	killed	him	feasting,	as	one	strikes	down	an	ox	at	his	manger.
Not	one	of	Agamemnon's	men	who	followed	him	was	left
alive,	nor	one	of	Aigisthos'	men.	All	were	killed	in	the	palace.”
So	he	spoke,	and	the	inward	heart	in	me	was	broken,
and	I	sat	down	on	the	sand	and	cried,	nor	did	the	heart	in	me	540	wish	to
go	on	living	any	longer	nor	to	look	on	the	sunlight.
But	when	I	had	glutted	myself	with	rolling	on	the	sand	and	weeping,	then
the	ever-truthful	Old	Man	of	the	Sea	said	to	me:
“No	longer	now,	son	of	Atreus,	spend	your	time	on	these	wasting	tears,	for
I	know	no	good	that	will	come	of	it.	Rather	with	all	speed	545	endeavor	to
make	good	your	way	back	to	the	land	of	your	fathers.
You	might	find	Aigisthos	still	alive,	or	perhaps	Orestes
has	beaten	you	to	the	kill,	but	you	might	be	there	for	the	burying.”
So	he	spoke,	and	the	heart	within	me	and	the	proud	spirit
of	the	breast	were	softened,	even	though	I	was	so	sorrowful,
550	and	now	I	spoke	aloud	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:
“These	then	I	know.	But	do	you	tell	me	the	name	of	the	third	man,
whoever	it	is	who	is	being	held	alive	on	the	wide	sea,
or	else	he	has	died,	but	for	all	my	sorrow,	I	would	hear	this.”
So	I	spoke,	and	he	in	turn	spoke	up	and	made	answer:
555	“That	was	Odysseus	son	of	Laertes,	who	makes	his	home	in
Ithaka,	whom	I	saw	on	an	island,	weeping	big	tears
in	the	palace	of	the	nymph	Kalypso,	and	she	detains	him
by	constraint,	and	he	cannot	make	his	way	to	his	country,
for	he	has	not	any	ships	by	him,	nor	any	companions
560	who	can	convey	him	back	across	the	sea's	wide	ridges.
But	for	you,	Menelaos,	O	fostered	of	Zeus,	it	is	not	the	gods'	will	that	you
shall	die	and	go	to	your	end	in	horse-pasturing	Argos,	but	the	immortals
will	convoy	you	to	the	
Elysian	Field
,	and	the	limits	of	the	earth,	where	fair-
haired	
Rhadamanthys
565	is,	and	where	there	is	made	the	easiest	life	for	mortals,
for	there	is	no	snow,	nor	much	winter	there,	nor	is	there	ever	rain,	but
always	the	stream	of	the	
Ocean
	sends	up	breezes
Gift-giving
of	the	West	Wind	blowing	briskly	for	the	refreshment	of	mortals.
This,	because	Helen	is	yours	and	you	are	son-in-law	therefore	570	to
Zeus.”	He	spoke,	and	dived	back	into	the	tossing	deep	water.
But	I	went	back	again	to	my	ships,	and	my	godlike	companions
went	with	me,	but	my	heart	was	a	storm	in	me	as	I	went.	Now
when	we	had	come	back	to	where	our	ship	lay	by	the	seaside,
we	made	ready	our	dinner,	and	the	immortal	night	came	over,
575	and	then	we	lay	down	to	sleep	along	the	break	of	the	sea	beach.
But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
first	of	all	we	dragged	the	ship	down	into	the	bright	water,
and	in	the	balanced	ships	set	the	masts	in	place,	and	set	sails,	and	we
ourselves	also	went	aboard	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks,
580	and	sitting	well	in	order	we	dashed	the	oars	in	the	gray	sea,	back	to	where
Egypt	is,	the	sky-fallen	river,	and	there
I	stranded	my	ships,	and	there	I	rendered	complete	hecatombs.
But	when	I	had	ended	the	anger	of	the	gods,	who	are	everlasting,	I	piled	a
mound	for	Agamemnon,	so	that	his	memory
585	might	never	die.	I	did	this,	and	set	sail,	and	the	immortals	gave	me	a
wind,	so	brought	me	back	to	my	own	dear	country
with	all	speed.	Come,	now,	stay	here	with	me	in	my	palace
until	it	is	the	eleventh	day	and	even	the	twelfth	day,
and	then	I	will	send	you	well	on	your	way,	and	give	you	glorious	590	gifts,
three	horses	and	a	well-finished	chariot;	also
I	will	give	you	a	fine	goblet	so	that	you	can	pour	libations
to	the	immortals;	and	think	of	me,	all	your	days,	when	you	do	so.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Son	of	Atreus,	do	not	keep	me	with	you	here	for	a	long	time,	595	since	I
could	well	be	satisfied	to	sit	here	beside	you
for	a	year's	time,	without	any	longing	for	home	or	parents,
such	strange	pleasure	do	I	take	listening	to	your	stories
and	sayings,	but	by	now	my	companions	in	sacred	Pylos
are	growing	restless,	yet	for	some	time	you	would	keep	me	with	you.
600	And	let	the	gift	you	give	me	be	something	that	can	be	stored	up.
I	will	not	take	the	horses	to	Ithaka,	but	will	leave	them
here,	for	your	own	delight,	since	you	are	lord	of	a	spreading	plain,	there	is
plenty	of	clover	here,	there	is	galingale,
and	there	is	wheat	and	millet	here	and	white	barley,	wide	grown.
605	There	are	no	wide	courses	in	Ithaka,	there	is	no	meadow;
a	place	to	feed	goats;	but	lovelier	than	a	place	to	feed	horses;
The	suitors	learn	of	Telemachos'	voyage
for	there	is	no	one	of	the	islands	that	has	meadows	for	driving	horses;	they
are	all	sea	slopes;	and	Ithaka	more	than	all	the	others.’
He	spoke,	and	Menelaos	of	the	great	war	cry	smiled	on	him,
610	and	stroked	him	with	his	hand	and	called	him	by	name	and	spoke	to	him:
‘You	are	of	true	blood,	dear	child,	in	the	way	you	reason.
So	I	shall	change	all	this	for	you,	since	I	am	able	to,
and	of	all	those	gifts	that	lie	stored	away	in	my	house	I	will	give	you	the
one	which	is	most	splendid	and	esteemed	at	the	highest	value.
615	I	will	give	you	a	fashioned	mixing	bowl.	It	is	of	silver
all	but	the	edges,	and	these	are	finished	in	gold.	This	is
the	work	of	
Hephaistos
.	The	hero	
Phaidimos
,	the	Sidonians'
king,	gave	it	to	me,	when	his	house	took	me	in	and	sheltered	me	there	on
my	way	home.	I	would	give	it	to	you	for	a	present.’
620	So	these	two	remained	conversing	this	way	together,
and	the	banqueters	came	now	into	the	divine	king's	palace,
and	they	drove	sheep	and	carried	heartening	wine,	and	with	them	their
wives,	in	handsome	hoods,	brought	food	along.	In	this	way	they	about	the
palace	were	busy	preparing	dinner;
625	but	meanwhile	before	the	palace	of	Odysseus	the	suitors
amused	themselves	with	discs	and	with	light	spears	for	throwing	on	a
leveled	floor,	unruly	men	as	they	always	had	been,
but	Antinoös	and	Eurymachos	the	godlike	were	seated
as	lords	of	the	suitors,	out	and	away	the	best	men	among	them,	630	and	to
them	now	came	Phronios'	son	Noëmon,	approaching
Antinoös,	and	spoke	to	him	and	asked	him	a	question:
‘Antinoös,	do	we	have	an	idea	in	our	minds	or	do	we
not,	when	Telemachos	will	come	back	from	sandy	Pylos?
He	has	gone,	and	taken	my	ship,	and	now	I	find	that	I	need	her	635	for
crossing	over	to	spacious	
Elis
,	where	I	have	a	dozen	horses,	mares,	and
suckling	from	them	hard-working	unbroken
mules;	I	would	like	to	break	one	in,	taking	it	from	the	others.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	were	amazed	at	heart;	they	had	not	thought
he	had	gone	to	Pylos,	the	city	of	Neleus,	but	that	he	was	somewhere	640
near,	on	his	lands,	among	the	flocks,	or	else	with	the	swineherd.
It	was	Antinoös	the	son	of	Eupeithes	that	answered:
‘Tell	me	the	truth	now,	when	did	he	go,	and	which	of	the	young	men	went
with	him?	The	choice	men	of	Ithaka,	or	were	they	his	own	following,
henchmen	and	servants?	Even	he	could	accomplish	so	much.
645	And	tell	me	this	and	tell	me	truly,	so	I	can	be	certain,
Ambush	plotted	against	Telemachos
did	he	take	your	black	ship	from	you	by	force,	when	you	were	unwilling,
or	did	you	willingly	give	it	him,	when	he	spoke	to	you	for	it?’
Then	the	son	of	Noëmon,	Phronios,	gave	him	an	answer:
‘I	gave	it	to	him	of	my	free	will.	What	else	could	one	do
650	when	a	man	like	this,	with	so	many	cares	to	trouble	his	spirit,	asked	for	it?
It	would	be	hard	to	deny	him	the	giving.
And	the	young	men	who	are	going	along	with	him	are	the	noblest	in	our
neighborhood.	Also,	I	saw	going	aboard	as	leader
Mentor,	or	it	was	a	god,	but	he	was	in	every	way	like	him,
655	and	yet	I	wonder,	for	yesterday	early	I	saw	the	splendid
Mentor	here;	before,	he	was	boarding	a	ship	for	Pylos.’
So	he	spoke,	and	went	away	to	the	house	of	his	father,
and	the	proud	heart	in	both	these	suitors	was	filled	with	amazement.
They	had	the	suitors	sit	down	in	a	group	and	stopped	their	contests.
660	It	was	Antinoös	the	son	of	Eupeithes	who	spoke	to	them,
raging,	the	heart	within	filled	black	to	the	brim	with	anger
from	beneath,	but	his	two	eyes	showed	like	fire	in	their	blazing:	‘Here	now
is	a	monstrous	thing,	this	voyage	made	by	Telemachos,	and	insolently	put
through.	We	thought	he	would	never	achieve	it.
665	A	young	boy,	in	despite	of	so	many	of	us,	has	hauled	down
his	ship,	and	gone	away,	choosing	out	the	best	men	in	the	country.
The	evil	will	begin	to	go	further.	May	Zeus	grant	destruction	of	the	life	in
him,	before	he	comes	to	full	measure	of	manhood.
But	come	now,	give	me	a	fast	ship	and	twenty	companions,
670	so	that	I	can	watch	his	return	and	lie	in	wait	for	him
in	the	narrow	strait	between	Ithaka	and	towering	Samos,
and	make	him	sorry	for	this	sea-going	in	search	of	his	father.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	all	approved	what	he	said	and	urged	it,
and	at	once	they	stood	up	and	went	inside	the	house	of	Odysseus.
675	Nor	did	Penelope	go	for	a	long	time	without	knowing
of	the	counsels	which	the	suitors	had	been	secretly	planning,	for	
Medon
the	herald	told	her,	having	overheard	their	counsels.
He	had	been	standing	outside	the	court	while	they	plotted	inside	it,	and	he
went	on	his	way	with	the	message	into	the	house	of	Penelope.
680	Penelope	spoke	to	him	as	he	stepped	over	the	threshold:
‘Herald,	on	what	errand	have	the	proud	suitors	sent	you?
Is	it	to	tell	the	serving	maids	of	godlike	Odysseus
to	stop	their	work,	so	as	to	prepare	the	suitors	a	dinner?
Could	this	not	be	the	last	and	the	latest	time	of	their	dining
Penelope	hears	the	news
685	here,	whether	coming	to	court	me	or	meeting	for	some	other	reason?
You,	who	keep	gathering	here,	and	consuming	away	much	livelihood,	the
property	of	wise	Telemachos,	nor	have	you	listened
to	what	you	heard	from	your	fathers	before	you,	when	you	were	children,
what	kind	of	man	Odysseus	was	among	your	own	parents,
690	how	he	did	no	act	and	spoke	no	word	in	his	own	country
that	was	unfair;	and	that	is	a	way	divine	kings	have,	one
will	be	hateful	to	a	certain	man,	and	favor	another,
but	Odysseus	was	never	outrageous	at	all	to	any	man.
But	in	you	the	spirit	is	plain	to	see,	and	your	unjust	actions,	695	how	you
have	no	gratitude	thereafter	for	good	things	done	you.’
Medon	in	turn,	a	man	of	thoughtful	mind,	said	to	her:
‘If	only,	my	queen,	that	could	be	the	worst	of	the	evil.
But	the	suitors	now	are	devising	another	thing	that	is	much	worse	and
harder	to	bear.	May	the	son	of	Kronos	not	see	it	accomplished.
700	Now	they	are	minded	to	kill	Telemachos	with	the	sharp	bronze	on	his	way
home.	He	went	in	quest	of	news	of	his	father
to	Pylos	the	sacrosanct	and	to	glorious	Lakedaimon.’
So	he	spoke,	and	her	knees	gave	way	and	the	heart	in	her.
She	stayed	a	long	time	without	a	word,	speechless,	and	her	eyes	705	filled
with	tears,	the	springing	voice	was	held	still	within	her.
At	long	last	she	found	words	to	speak	to	him	and	answer:
‘Herald,	why	is	my	child	gone	from	me?	There	was	no	reason
for	him	to	board	fast-running	ships,	which	serve	as	horses
for	men	on	the	salt	sea,	and	they	cross	the	expanses	of	water.
710	Must	it	be	so	that	even	his	name	shall	be	gone	from	men's	minds?’
Medon	then,	a	thoughtful	man,	spoke	to	her	in	answer:
‘I	do	not	know	whether	some	god	moved	him,	or	whether	his	own	mind
had	the	impulse	to	go	to	Pylos,	in	order	to	find	out
about	his	father's	homecoming,	or	what	fate	he	had	met	with.’
715	So	speaking	he	went	away	back	into	the	house	of	Odysseus,
and	a	cloud	of	heart-wasting	sorrow	was	on	her,	she	had	no	strength	left	to
sit	down	in	a	chair,	though	there	were	many	there	in	the	palace,	but	sat
down	on	the	floor	of	her	own	well-wrought	bedchamber
weeping	pitifully,	and	about	her	her	maids	were	wailing
720	all,	who	were	there	in	the	house	with	her,	both	young	and	old	ones.
To	them	weeping	constantly	Penelope	spoke	now:
‘Hear	me,	dear	friends.	The	Olympian	has	given	me	sorrows
beyond	all	others	who	were	born	and	brought	up	together
The	sorrows	of	Penelope
with	me,	for	first	I	lost	a	husband	with	the	heart	of	a	lion
725	and	who	among	the	Danaans	surpassed	in	all	virtues,
and	great,	whose	fame	goes	wide	through	Hellas	and	midmost	Argos;	and
now	again	the	stormwinds	have	caught	away	my	beloved
son,	without	trace,	from	the	halls,	and	I	never	heard	when	he	left	me.
Hard-hearted,	not	one	out	of	all	of	you	then	remembered
730	to	wake	me	out	of	my	bed,	though	your	minds	knew	all	clearly,	when	he
went	out	and	away	to	board	the	hollow	black	ship.
For	if	I	had	heard	that	he	was	considering	this	journey,
then	he	would	have	had	to	stay,	though	hastening	to	his	voyage,	or	he
would	have	had	to	leave	me	dead	in	the	halls.	So	now
735	let	someone	make	her	way	quickly	and	summon	the	old	man	
Dolios
,	my
own	servant,	whom	my	father	gave	me	to	have	as	I	came	here,	and	he
keeps	an	orchard	full	of	trees	for	me,	so	that	he	may
go	with	speed	to	Laertes	and	sit	beside	him	and	tell	him
all,	and	perhaps	he,	weaving	out	the	design	in	his	heart,
740	may	go	outside	and	complain	to	the	people	of	those	who	are	striving	to
waste	away	his	own	seed	and	that	of	godlike	Odysseus.’
Then	in	turn	Eurykleia	her	dear	nurse	said	to	her:
‘Kill	me	then,	dear	girl,	with	the	pitiless	bronze,	or	else
let	me	be	in	the	halls.	I	will	not	hide	the	story	from	you.
745	I	did	know	all	these	things,	and	I	gave	him	all	that	he	asked	for,	both
bread	and	sweet	wine,	but	he	took	a	great	oath	from	me
never	to	tell	you	of	it	until	it	came	to	the	twelfth	day,
or	until	you	might	miss	him	yourself	or	hear	he	was	absent,
so	that	you	might	not	ruin	your	lovely	skin	with	weeping.
750	But	go,	wash	with	water	and	put	clean	clothing	upon	your	body,	and
going	on	to	the	upper	story	with	your	attendant
women,	pray	to	Athene	daughter	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis,
for	she	would	then	be	able	to	save	him,	even	from	dying.
But	do	not	embitter	the	bitterness	of	the	old	man.	I	think
755	the	seed	of	Arkeisios	is	not	altogether	hated
by	the	blessed	gods,	but	there	will	still	be	one	left	to	inherit	the	high-roofed
house	and	the	rich	fields	that	lie	at	a	distance.’
So	she	spoke,	and	stilled	her	grieving	and	stopped	the	weeping
of	her	eyes,	and	she	washed	and	put	clean	clothing	upon	her	body;	760	and
went	to	the	upper	story	with	her	attendant	women,
and	laid	the	barley	grains	in	the	basket	and	prayed	to	Athene:	‘Hear	me,
Atrytone
,	child	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis,
The	ambush	is	set
if	ever	here	in	his	own	palace	resourceful	Odysseus
burned	the	rich	thigh	pieces	of	an	ox	or	sheep	in	your	honor,	765	remember
it	now	for	my	sake	and	save	for	me	my	beloved
son,	and	fend	off	the	suitors	who	are	evilly	overbearing.’
She	spoke,	and	raised	the	outcry,	and	the	goddess	listened	to	her
praying.
But	the	suitors	all	through	the	shadowy	halls	were	raising	a	tumult,	and
thus	would	go	the	word	of	one	of	the	arrogant	young	men:
770	‘Surely	our	much	sought-after	queen	is	consenting	to	marriage	with	one
of	us,	not	knowing	how	the	murder	of	her	son	is	appointed.’
Thus	one	of	them	would	speak,	not	knowing	what	was	appointed.
But	it	was	Antinoös	who	now	stood	forth	and	addressed	them:
‘You	are	all	mad.	Keep	clear	of	all	this	kind	of	disorderly
775	talk,	for	fear	somebody	may	go	inside	and	report	us.
But	come	let	us	silently	rise	up	now	and	put	into	action
that	counsel	which	has	been	resolved	in	the	hearts	of	all	of	us.’
So	he	spoke,	and	chose	out	the	twenty	best	men	among	them,
and	they	went	along	to	the	fast	ship	and	the	sand	of	the	seashore,	780	and
first	of	all	they	dragged	the	ship	out	to	the	deepening	water,	and	in	the
black	hull	set	the	mast	in	place,	and	set	sails,
and	made	the	oars	fast	in	the	leather	slings	of	the	oarlocks
all	in	good	order,	and	hoisted	the	white	sails	and	set	them,
and	their	high-hearted	henchmen	carried	their	gear	on	for	them.
785	They	anchored	her	deep	enough	in	the	channel,	and	then	disembarking
themselves,	prepared	their	dinner	and	waited	for	the	coming	of	evening.
But	she	in	the	upper	chamber,	circumspect	Penelope,
lay	there	fasting,	she	had	tasted	no	food	nor	drink,	only
pondering	whether	her	stately	son	would	escape	from	dying
790	or	have	to	go	down	under	the	hands	of	the	insolent	suitors;
and	as	much	as	a	lion	caught	in	a	crowd	of	men	turns	about
in	fear,	when	they	have	made	a	treacherous	circle	about	him,
so	she	was	pondering,	when	the	painless	sleep	came	upon	her
and	all	her	joints	were	relaxed	so	that	she	slept	there	reclining.
795	Then	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	thought	what	to	do	next.
She	made	an	image,	and	likened	it	to	Penelope's	sister
Iphthime
,	the	daughter	of	great-hearted	Ikarios,	whose	husband	was
Eumelos
,	and	he	lived	in	his	home	at	
Pherai
.
She	sent	her	now	into	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus
800	in	order	to	stop	Penelope,	who	was	grieving,	lamenting,
A	dream	from	Athene
from	her	crying	and	tearful	lamentation.	The	dream	figure
went	into	the	bedchamber	passing	beside	the	thong	of	the	door	bar,	and
came	and	stood	above	her	head	and	spoke	a	word	to	her:
‘Penelope,	are	you	sleeping	so	sorrowful	in	the	inward
805	heart?	But	the	gods	who	live	at	their	ease	do	not	suffer	you	to	weep	and	to
be	troubled,	since	your	son	will	have	his	homecoming	even	yet,	since	he
has	done	no	wrong	in	the	gods'	sight.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	her	in	answer,
sleeping	very	sweetly	now	in	the	dreams'	gateway:
810	‘Why	have	you	come	here,	sister,	now,	when	you	were	not	used	to	come
before,	since	the	home	where	you	live	is	far	away	from	us,	and	now	you
tell	me	to	give	over	from	the	grieving	and	sorrows	that	are	many	upon	me
and	trouble	me	in	my	heart	and	spirit,
since	first	I	lost	a	husband	with	the	heart	of	a	lion,
815	and	who	among	the	Danaans	surpassed	in	all	virtues,
a	great	man,	whose	fame	goes	wide	through	Hellas	and	midmost	Argos;
and	now	again	a	beloved	son	is	gone	on	a	hollow
ship,	an	innocent	all	unversed	in	fighting	and	speaking,
and	it	is	for	him	I	grieve	even	more	than	for	that	other	one,	820	and
tremble	for	him	and	fear,	lest	something	should	happen	to	him	either	in	the
country	where	he	has	gone,	or	on	the	wide	sea,
for	he	has	many	who	hate	him	and	are	contriving	against	him
and	striving	to	kill	him	before	he	comes	back	into	his	own	country.’
Then	in	turn	the	dark	dream	image	spoke	to	her	in	answer:
825	‘Take	courage,	let	not	your	heart	be	too	altogether	frightened,	such	an
escort	goes	along	with	him,	and	one	that	other
men	would	have	prayed	to	have	standing	beside	them,	for	she	has	power,
Pallas	Athene,	and	she	has	pity	on	you	in	your	grieving,
and	it	is	she	who	has	sent	me	to	you	to	tell	you	of	these	things.’
830	Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘If	then	you	are	a	god,	and	have	heard	the	voice	of	the	goddess,	come	then,
tell	me	of	that	other	unfortunate,	tell	me
whether	he	still	lives	and	looks	upon	the	sun's	shining,
or	whether	he	has	died	and	is	now	in	the	house	of	
Hades
.’
835	Then	in	turn	the	dark	dream	image	spoke	to	her	in	answer:
‘As	for	that	other	one,	I	will	not	tell	you	the	whole	story
whether	he	lives	or	has	died.	It	is	bad	to	babble	emptily.’
So	she	spoke,	and	drifted	away	by	the	bolt	and	the	door	post
and	out	and	into	the	blowing	winds.	Ikarios'	daughter
comforts	Penelope
840	started	up	from	her	sleep,	soothed	in	the	inward	heart,	because	this	clear
dream	in	the	dim	of	the	night	had	come	to	visit	her.
But	the	suitors	went	aboard	and	sailed	out	into	the	flowing
ways,	in	their	hearts	devising	sudden	death	for	Telemachos.
There	is	a	rocky	island	there	in	the	middle	channel
845	halfway	between	Ithaka	and	towering	Samos,
called	
Asteris
,	not	large,	but	it	has	a	double	anchorage	where	ships	can	be
hidden.	There	the	Achaians	waited	in	ambush.
BOOK	V
Now	Dawn	rose	from	her	bed,	where	she	lay	by	haughty	
Tithonos
,
carrying	light	to	the	immortal	gods	and	to	mortals,
and	the	gods	came	and	took	their	places	in	session,	and	among	them	Zeus
who	thunders	on	high,	and	it	is	his	power	that	is	greatest,	5	and	Athene
spoke	to	them	of	the	many	cares	of	Odysseus,
remembering.	Though	he	was	in	the	nymph's	house,	she	still	thought	of
him:	‘Father	Zeus,	and	all	other	blessed	gods	everlasting,
no	longer	now	let	one	who	is	a	sceptered	king	be	eager
to	be	gentle	and	kind,	be	one	whose	thought	is	schooled	in	justice,	10	but
let	him	always	rather	be	harsh,	and	act	severely,
seeing	the	way	no	one	of	the	people	he	was	lord	over
remembers	godlike	Odysseus,	and	he	was	kind,	like	a	father.
But	now	he	lies	away	on	an	island	suffering	strong	pains
in	the	palace	of	the	nymph	Kalypso,	and	she	detains	him
15	by	constraint,	and	he	cannot	make	his	way	to	his	country,
for	he	has	not	any	ships	by	him,	nor	any	companions
who	can	convey	him	back	across	the	sea's	wide	ridges.
And	now	there	are	those	who	are	determined	to	murder	his	dear	son	on	his
way	home.	He	went	in	quest	of	news	of	his	father
20	to	Pylos	the	sacrosanct	and	to	glorious	Lakedaimon.’
Then	in	turn	Zeus	who	gathers	the	clouds	made	answer:
‘My	child,	what	sort	of	word	has	escaped	your	teeth's	barrier?
For	is	not	this	your	own	intention,	as	you	have	counseled	it,
Hermes	is	sent	to	liberate	Odysseus
how	Odysseus	shall	make	his	way	back,	and	punish	those	others?
25	Then	bring	Telemachos	home	skillfully,	since	you	can	do	this,	so	that	all
without	harm	he	can	come	back	to	his	own	country	while	the	suitors	in
their	ship	come	back	with	nothing	accomplished.’
He	spoke,	and	then	spoke	directly	to	his	beloved	son,	Hermes:
‘Hermes,	since	for	other	things	also	you	are	our	messenger,	30	announce	to
the	nymph	with	the	lovely	hair	our	absolute	purpose:	the	homecoming	of
enduring	Odysseus,	that	he	shall	come	back	by	the	convoy	neither	of	the
gods	nor	of	mortal	people,
but	he	shall	sail	on	a	jointed	raft	and,	suffering	hardships,	on	the	twentieth
day	make	his	landfall	on	fertile	
Scheria
35	at	the	country	of	the	
Phaiakians
	who	are	near	the	gods	in	origin,	and	they
will	honor	him	in	their	hearts	as	a	god,	and	send	him	back,	by	ship,	to	the
beloved	land	of	his	fathers,
bestowing	bronze	and	gold	in	abundance	upon	him,	and	clothing,	more
than	Odysseus	could	ever	have	taken	away	from	Troy,	even	40	if	he	had
escaped	unharmed	with	his	fair	share	of	the	plunder.
For	so	it	is	fated	that	he	shall	see	his	people	and	come	back	to	his	house
with	the	high	roof	and	to	the	land	of	his	fathers.’
He	spoke,	nor	disobeyed	him	the	courier	Argeïphontes.
Immediately	he	bound	upon	his	feet	the	fair	sandals,
45	golden	and	immortal,	that	carried	him	over	the	water
as	over	the	dry	boundless	earth	abreast	of	the	wind's	blast.
He	caught	up	the	staff,	with	which	he	mazes	the	eyes	of	those	mortals
whose	eyes	he	would	maze,	or	wakes	again	the	sleepers.	Holding	this	in
his	hands,	strong	Argeïphontes	winged	his	way	onward.
50	He	stood	on	
Pieria
	and	launched	himself	from	the	bright	air	across	the	sea
and	sped	the	wave	tops,	like	a	shearwater
who	along	the	deadly	deep	ways	of	the	barren	salt	sea
goes	hunting	fish	and	sprays	quick-beating	wings	in	the	salt	brine.
In	such	a	likeness	Hermes	rode	over	much	tossing	water.
55	But	after	he	had	made	his	way	to	the	far-lying	island,
he	stepped	then	out	of	the	dark	blue	sea,	and	walked	on	over	the	dry	land,
till	he	came	to	the	great	cave,	where	the	lovely-haired	nymph	was	at	home,
and	he	found	that	she	was	inside.	There	was	a	great	fire	blazing	on	the
hearth,	and	the	smell	of	cedar	60	split	in	billets,	and	sweetwood	burning,
spread	all	over
the	island.	She	was	singing	inside	the	cave	with	a	sweet	voice	as	she	went
up	and	down	the	loom	and	wove	with	a	golden	shuttle.
Kalypso's	island
There	was	a	growth	of	grove	around	the	cavern,	flourishing,	alder	was
there,	and	the	black	poplar,	and	fragrant	cypress,	65	and	there	were	birds
with	spreading	wings	who	made	their	nests	in	it,	little	owls,	and	hawks,
and	birds	of	the	sea	with	long	beaks	who	are	like	ravens,	but	all	their	work
is	on	the	sea	water;	and	right	about	the	hollow	cavern	extended	a
flourishing
growth	of	vine	that	ripened	with	grape	clusters.	Next	to	it	70	there	were
four	fountains,	and	each	of	them	ran	shining	water,	each	next	to	each,	but
turned	to	run	in	sundry	directions;	and	round	about	there	were	meadows
growing	soft	with	parsley	and	violets,	and	even	a	god	who	came	into	that
place
would	have	admired	what	he	saw,	the	heart	delighted	within	him.
75	There	the	courier	Argeïphontes	stood	and	admired	it.
But	after	he	had	admired	all	in	his	heart,	he	went	in
to	the	wide	cave,	nor	did	the	shining	goddess	Kalypso
fail	to	recognize	him	when	she	saw	him	come	into	her	presence;	for	the
immortal	gods	are	not	such	as	to	go	unrecognized
80	by	one	another,	not	even	if	one	lives	in	a	far	home.
But	Hermes	did	not	find	great-hearted	Odysseus	indoors,
but	he	was	sitting	out	on	the	beach,	crying,	as	before	now	he	had	done,
breaking	his	heart	in	tears,	lamentation,	and	sorrow,	as	weeping	tears	he
looked	out	over	the	barren	water.
85	But	Kalypso,	shining	among	goddesses,	questioned	Hermes
when	she	had	seated	him	on	a	chair	that	shone	and	glittered:	‘How	is	it,
Hermes	of	the	golden	staff,	you	have	come	to	me?
I	honor	you	and	love	you;	but	you	have	not	come	much	before	this.
Speak	what	is	in	your	mind.	My	heart	is	urgent	to	do	it
90	if	I	can,	and	if	it	is	a	thing	that	can	be	accomplished.
But	come	in	with	me,	so	I	can	put	entertainment	before	you.’
So	the	goddess	spoke,	and	she	set	before	him	a	table
which	she	had	filled	with	ambrosia,	and	mixed	red	nectar	for	him.
The	courier,	Hermes	Argeïphontes,	ate	and	drank	then,
95	but	when	he	had	dined	and	satisfied	his	hunger	with	eating,	then	he	began
to	speak,	answering	what	she	had	asked	him:
‘You,	a	goddess,	ask	me,	a	god,	why	I	came,	and	therefore
I	will	tell	you	the	whole	truth	of	the	tale.	It	is	you	who	ask	me.
It	was	Zeus	who	told	me	to	come	here.	I	did	not	wish	to.
100	Who	would	willingly	make	the	run	across	this	endless
salt	water?	And	there	is	no	city	of	men	nearby,	nor	people
Hermes	tells	her	to	let	Odysseus	go
who	offer	choice	hecatombs	to	the	gods,	and	perform	sacrifice.
But	there	is	no	way	for	another	god	to	elude	the	purpose
of	aegis-bearing	Zeus	or	bring	it	to	nothing.	He	says
105	you	have	with	you	the	man	who	is	wretched	beyond	all	the	other	men	of
all	those	who	fought	around	the	city	of	Priam
for	nine	years,	and	in	the	tenth	they	sacked	the	city	and	set	sail	for	home,
but	on	the	voyage	home	they	offended	Athene,
who	let	loose	an	evil	tempest	and	tall	waves	against	them.
110	Then	all	the	rest	of	his	excellent	companions	perished,
but	the	wind	and	the	current	carried	him	here	and	here	they	drove	him.
Now	Zeus	tells	you	to	send	him	on	his	way	with	all	speed.
It	is	not	appointed	for	him	to	die	here,	away	from	his	people.
It	is	still	his	fate	that	he	shall	see	his	people	and	come	back	115	to	his
house	with	the	high	roof	and	to	the	land	of	his	fathers.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Kalypso,	shining	among	divinities,
shuddered,	and	answered	him	in	winged	words	and	addressed	him:	‘You
are	hard-hearted,	you	gods,	and	jealous	beyond	all	creatures	beside,	when
you	are	resentful	toward	the	goddesses	for	sleeping	120	openly	with	such
men	as	each	has	made	her	true	husband.
So	when	Dawn	of	the	rosy	fingers	chose	out	
Orion
,	all	you	gods	who	live
at	your	ease	were	full	of	resentment,	until	chaste	Artemis	of	the	golden
throne	in	
Ortygia
came	with	a	visitation	of	painless	arrows	and	killed	him;
125	and	so	it	was	when	
Demeter
	of	the	lovely	hair,	yielding	to	her	desire,	lay
down	with	
Iasion
	and	loved	him	in	a	thrice-turned	field,	it	was	not	long
before	this	was	made	known	to	Zeus,	who	struck	him	down	with	a	cast	of
the	shining	thunderbolt.
So	now,	you	gods,	you	resent	it	in	me	that	I	keep	beside	me	130	a	man,	the
one	I	saved	when	he	clung	astride	of	the	keel	board	all	alone,	since	Zeus
with	a	cast	of	the	shining	thunderbolt	had	shattered	his	fast	ship	midway	on
the	wine-blue	water.
Then	all	the	rest	of	his	excellent	companions	perished,
but	the	wind	and	the	current	carried	him	here	and	here	they	drove	him,	135
and	I	gave	him	my	love	and	cherished	him,	and	I	had	hopes	also	that	I
could	make	him	immortal	and	all	his	days	to	be	endless.
But	since	there	is	no	way	for	another	god	to	elude	the	purpose	of	aegis-
bearing	Zeus	or	bring	it	to	nothing,	let	him	go,
let	him	go,	if	he	himself	is	asking	for	this	and	desires	it,	140	out	on	the
barren	sea;	but	I	will	not	give	him	conveyance,
Kalypso	tells	Odysseus
for	I	have	not	any	ships	by	me	nor	any	companions
who	can	convey	him	back	across	the	sea's	wide	ridges;
but	I	will	freely	give	him	my	counsel	and	hold	back	nothing,	so	that	all
without	harm	he	can	come	back	to	his	own	country.’
145	Then	in	turn	the	courier	Argeïphontes	answered	her:	‘Then	send	him
accordingly	on	his	way,	and	beware	of	the	anger	of	Zeus,	lest	he	hold	a
grudge	hereafter	and	rage	against	you.’
So	spoke	powerful	Argeïphontes,	and	there	he	left	her,
while	she,	the	queenly	nymph,	when	she	had	been	given	the	message	150
from	Zeus,	set	out	searching	after	great-hearted	Odysseus,	and	found	him
sitting	on	the	the	seashore,	and	his	eyes	were	never	wiped	dry	of	tears,	and
the	sweet	lifetime	was	draining	out	of	him,	as	he	wept	for	a	way	home,
since	the	nymph	was	no	longer	pleasing	to	him.	By	nights	he	would	lie
beside	her,	of	necessity,
155	in	the	hollow	caverns,	against	his	will,	by	one	who	was	willing,	but	all	the
days	he	would	sit	upon	the	rocks,	at	the	seaside,	breaking	his	heart	in	tears
and	lamentation	and	sorrow
as	weeping	tears	he	looked	out	over	the	barren	water.
She,	bright	among	divinities,	stood	near	and	spoke	to	him:	160	‘Poor	man,
no	longer	mourn	here	beside	me	nor	let	your	lifetime	fade	away,	since	now
I	will	send	you	on,	with	a	good	will.
So	come,	cut	long	timbers	with	a	bronze	ax	and	join	them
to	make	a	wide	raft,	and	fashion	decks	that	will	be	on	the	upper	side,	to
carry	you	over	the	misty	face	of	the	water.
165	Then	I	will	stow	aboard	her	bread	and	water	and	ruddy
wine,	strength-giving	goods	that	will	keep	the	hunger	from	you,	and	put
clothing	on	you,	and	send	a	following	stern	wind	after,	so	that	all	without
harm	you	can	come	back	to	your	own	country,	if	only	the	gods	consent.	It
is	they	who	hold	wide	heaven.
170	And	they	are	more	powerful	than	I	to	devise	and	accomplish.’
So	she	spoke	to	him,	but	long-suffering	great	Odysseus
shuddered	to	hear,	and	spoke	again	in	turn	and	addressed	her:	‘Here	is
some	other	thing	you	devise,	O	goddess;	it	is	not	conveyance,	when	you
tell	me	to	cross	the	sea's	great	open	175	space	on	a	raft.	That	is	dangerous
and	hard.	Not	even
balanced	ships	rejoicing	in	a	wind	from	Zeus	cross	over.
I	will	not	go	aboard	any	raft	without	your	good	will,
nor	unless,	goddess,	you	can	bring	yourself	to	swear	me	a	great	oath	that
this	is	not	some	painful	trial	you	are	planning	against	me.’
the	will	of	the	gods
180	So	he	spoke,	and	Kalypso,	shining	among	divinities,	smiled	and	stroked
him	with	her	hand	and	spoke	to	him	and	named	him:	‘You	are	so	naughty,
and	you	will	have	your	own	way	in	all	things.
See	how	you	have	spoken	to	me	and	reason	with	me.
Earth	be	my	witness	in	this,	and	the	wide	heaven	above	us,	185	and	the
dripping	water	of	the	
Styx
,	which	oath	is	the	biggest	and	most	formidable
oath	among	the	blessed	immortals,
that	this	is	no	other	painful	trial	I	am	planning	against	you,	but	I	am
thinking	and	planning	for	you	just	as	I	would	do	it	for	my	own	self,	if	such
needs	as	yours	were	to	come	upon	me;	190	for	the	mind	in	me	is
reasonable,	and	I	have	no	spirit
of	iron	inside	my	heart.	Rather,	it	is	compassionate.
So	she	spoke,	a	shining	goddess,	and	led	the	way	swiftly,
and	the	man	followed	behind	her	walking	in	the	god's	footsteps.
They	made	their	way,	the	man	and	the	god,	to	the	hollow	cavern,	195	and
he	seated	himself	upon	the	chair	from	which	Hermes	lately	had	risen,
while	the	nymph	set	all	manner	of	food	before	him	to	eat	and	drink,	such
things	as	mortal	people	feed	upon.
She	herself	sat	across	the	table	from	godlike	Odysseus,
and	her	serving	maids	set	nectar	and	ambrosia	before	her.
200	They	put	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
But	after	they	had	taken	their	pleasure	in	eating	and	drinking,	the	talking
was	begun	by	the	shining	goddess	Kalypso:
‘Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
are	you	still	all	so	eager	to	go	on	back	to	your	own	house	205	and	the	land
of	your	fathers?	I	wish	you	well,	however	you	do	it,	but	if	you	only	knew
in	your	own	heart	how	many	hardships
you	were	fated	to	undergo	before	getting	back	to	your	country,	you	would
stay	here	with	me	and	be	the	lord	of	this	household	and	be	an	immortal,	for
all	your	longing	once	more	to	look	on	210	that	wife	for	whom	you	are
pining	all	your	days	here.	And	yet	I	think	that	I	can	claim	that	I	am	not	her
inferior
either	in	build	or	stature,	since	it	is	not	likely	that	mortal	women	can
challenge	the	goddesses	for	build	and	beauty.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
215	‘Goddess	and	queen,	do	not	be	angry	with	me.	I	myself	know	that	all	you
say	is	true	and	that	circumspect	Penelope
can	never	match	the	impression	you	make	for	beauty	and	stature.
She	is	mortal	after	all,	and	you	are	immortal	and	ageless.
Odysseus	builds	a	raft
But	even	so,	what	I	want	and	all	my	days	I	pine	for
220	is	to	go	back	to	my	house	and	see	my	day	of	homecoming.
And	if	some	god	batters	me	far	out	on	the	wine-blue	water,	I	will	endure	it,
keeping	a	stubborn	spirit	inside	me,
for	already	I	have	suffered	much	and	done	much	hard	work
on	the	waves	and	in	the	fighting.	So	let	this	adventure	follow.’
225	So	he	spoke,	and	the	sun	went	down	and	the	darkness	came	over.	These
two,	withdrawn	in	the	inner	recess	of	the	hollowed	cavern,	enjoyed
themselves	in	love	and	stayed	all	night	by	each	other,	But	when	the	young
Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,	Odysseus	wrapped	himself	in
an	outer	cloak	and	a	tunic,
230	while	she,	the	nymph,	mantled	herself	in	a	gleaming	white	robe	fine-
woven	and	delightful,	and	around	her	waist	she	fastened	a	handsome	belt
of	gold,	and	on	her	head	was	a	wimple.
She	set	about	planning	the	journey	for	great-hearted	Odysseus.
She	gave	him	a	great	ax	that	was	fitted	to	his	palms	and	headed	235	with
bronze,	with	a	double	edge	each	way,	and	fitted	inside	it	a	very	beautiful
handle	of	olive	wood,	well	hafted;
then	she	gave	him	a	well-finished	adze,	and	led	the	way	onward	to	the	far
end	of	the	island	where	there	were	trees,	tall	grown,	alder	and	black	poplar
and	fir	that	towered	to	the	heaven,	240	but	all	gone	dry	long	ago	and	dead,
so	they	would	float	lightly.
But	when	she	had	shown	him	where	the	tall	trees	grew,	Kalypso,	shining
among	divinities,	went	back	to	her	own	house
while	he	turned	to	cutting	his	timbers	and	quickly	had	his	work	finished.
He	threw	down	twenty	in	all,	and	trimmed	them	well	with	his	bronze	ax,
245	and	planed	them	expertly,	and	trued	them	straight	to	a	chalkline.
Kalypso,	the	shining	goddess,	at	that	time	came	back,	bringing	him	an
auger,	and	he	bored	through	them	all	and	pinned	them	together	with
dowels,	and	then	with	cords	he	lashed	his	raft	together.
And	as	great	as	is	the	bottom	of	a	broad	cargo-carrying
250	ship,	when	a	man	well	skilled	in	carpentry	fashions	it,	such	was	the	size
of	the	broad	raft	made	for	himself	by	Odysseus.
Next,	setting	up	the	deck	boards	and	fitting	them	to	close	uprights	he
worked	them	on,	and	closed	in	the	ends	with	sweeping	gunwales.
Then	he	fashioned	the	mast,	with	an	upper	deck	fitted	to	it,	255	and	made
in	addition	a	steering	oar	by	which	to	direct	her,	and	fenced	her	in	down
the	whole	length	with	wattles	of	osier	to	keep	the	water	out,	and	expended
much	timber	upon	this.
and	Kalypso	sends	him	off
Next	Kalypso,	the	shining	goddess,	brought	out	the	sail	cloth	to	make	the
sails	with,	and	he	carefully	worked	these	also,	260	and	attached	the	straps
and	halyards	and	sheets	all	in	place	aboard	her,	and	then	with	levers
worked	her	down	to	the	bright	salt	water.
It	was	the	fourth	day	and	all	his	work	was	finished.	Then	on
the	fifth	day	shining	Kalypso	saw	him	off	from	the	island
when	she	had	bathed	him	and	put	fragrant	clothing	upon	him,	265	and	the
goddess	put	two	skins	aboard,	one	filled	with	dark	wine	and	the	other,	the
big	one,	filled	with	water,	and	put	on	provisions	in	a	bag,	and	stored	there
many	good	things	to	keep	a	man's	strength	up,	and	sent	a	following	wind	to
carry	him,	warm	and	easy.
Glorious	Odysseus,	happy	with	the	wind,	spread	sails
270	and	taking	his	seat	artfully	with	the	steering	oar	he	held	her	on	her	course,
nor	did	sleep	ever	descend	on	his	eyelids
as	he	kept	his	eye	on	the	
Pleiades
	and	late-setting	
Boötes
,	and	the	Bear,	to
whom	men	give	also	the	name	of	the	Wagon,	who	turns	about	in	a	fixed
place	and	looks	at	Orion,
275	and	she	alone	is	never	plunged	in	the	wash	of	the	Ocean.
For	so	Kalypso,	bright	among	goddesses,	had	told	him
to	make	his	way	over	the	sea,	keeping	the	Bear	on	his	left	hand.
Seventeen	days	he	sailed,	making	his	way	over	the	water,
and	on	the	eighteenth	day	there	showed	the	shadowy	mountains	280	of	the
Phaiakian	land	where	it	stood	out	nearest	to	him,
and	it	looked	like	a	shield	lying	on	the	misty	face	of	the	water.
Coming	back	from	the	
Aithiopians
	the	strong	Earthshaker	saw	him
from	far	on	the	mountains	of	the	
Solymoi
.	He	was	visible	sailing	over	the
sea.	Poseidon	was	the	more	angered
285	with	him,	and	shook	his	head,	and	spoke	to	his	own	spirit:	‘For	shame,
surely	the	gods	have	rashly	changed	their	intentions	about	Odysseus	while
I	was	away	in	the	Aithiopians'
land,	and	he	nears	the	Phaiakian	country	where	it	is	appointed	that	he	shall
escape	this	great	trial	of	misery	that	is	now	his.
290	But	I	think	I	can	still	give	him	a	good	full	portion	of	trouble.’
He	spoke,	and	pulled	the	clouds	together,	in	both	hands	gripping
the	trident,	and	staggered	the	sea,	and	let	loose	all	the	stormblasts	of	all	the
winds	together,	and	huddled	under	the	cloud	scuds	land	alike	and	the	great
water.	Night	sprang	from	heaven.
295	East	Wind	and	South	Wind	clashed	together,	and	the	bitter	blown	West
Wind
Poseidon	wrecks	the	raft
and	the	North	Wind	born	in	the	bright	air	rolled	up	a	heavy	sea.
The	knees	of	Odysseus	gave	way	for	fear,	and	the	heart	inside	him,	and
deeply	troubled	he	spoke	to	his	own	great-hearted	spirit:	‘Ah	me	unhappy,
what	in	the	long	outcome	will	befall	me?
300	I	fear	the	goddess	might	have	spoken	the	truth	in	all	ways	when	she	said
that	on	the	sea	and	before	I	came	to	my	country	I	would	go	through
hardships;	now	all	this	is	being	accomplished,	such	clouds	are	these,	with
which	Zeus	is	cramming	the	wide	sky	and	has	staggered	the	sea,	and
stormblasts	of	winds	from	every	305	direction	are	crowding	in.	My	sheer
destruction	is	certain.
Three	times	and	four	times	happy	those	Danaans	were	who	died	then	in
wide	Troy	land,	bringing	favor	to	the	sons	of	Atreus,
as	I	wish	I	too	had	died	at	that	time	and	met	my	destiny
on	the	day	when	the	greatest	number	of	Trojans	threw	their	bronze-headed
310	weapons	upon	me,	over	the	body	of	perished	Achilleus,
and	I	would	have	had	my	rites	and	the	Achaians	given	me	glory.
Now	it	is	by	a	dismal	death	that	I	must	be	taken.’
As	he	spoke	so,	a	great	wave	drove	down	from	above	him
with	a	horrible	rush,	and	spun	the	raft	in	a	circle,
315	and	he	was	thrown	clear	far	from	the	raft	and	let	the	steering	oar	slip	from
his	hands.	A	terrible	gust	of	stormwinds	whirling	together	and	blowing
snapped	the	mast	tree	off	in	the	middle,	and	the	sail	and	the	upper	deck
were	thrown	far	and	fell	in	the	water.
He	himself	was	ducked	for	a	long	time,	nor	was	he	able
320	to	come	up	quickly	from	under	the	great	rush	of	the	water,	for	the	clothing
which	divine	Kalypso	had	given	weighted	him	down.	At	last	he	got	to	the
surface,	and	spat	the	bitter
salt	sea	water	that	drained	from	his	head,	which	was	filled	with	it.
But	he	did	not	forget	about	his	raft,	for	all	his	trouble,	325	but	turned	and
swam	back	through	the	waves,	and	laid	hold	of	it,	and	huddled	down	in	the
middle	of	it,	avoiding	death's	end.
Then	the	waves	tossed	her	about	the	current	now	here,	now	there;	as	the
North	Wind	in	autumn	tumbles	and	tosses	thistledown	along	the	plain,	and
the	bunches	hold	fast	one	on	another,	330	so	the	winds	tossed	her	on	the
great	sea,	now	here,	now	there,	and	now	it	would	be	South	Wind	and	North
that	pushed	her	between	them,	and	then	again	East	Wind	and	West	would
burst	in	and	follow.
but	Leukothea	rescues	Odysseus
The	daughter	of	
Kadmos
,	sweet-stepping	
Ino
	called	
Leukothea
,	saw
him.	She	had	once	been	one	who	spoke	as	a	mortal,
335	but	now	in	the	gulfs	of	the	sea	she	holds	degree	as	a	goddess.
She	took	pity	on	Odysseus	as	he	drifted	and	suffered	hardship,	and	likening
herself	to	a	winged	gannet	she	came	up
out	of	the	water	and	perched	on	the	raft	and	spoke	a	word	to	him:	‘Poor
man,	why	is	Poseidon	the	shaker	of	the	earth	so	bitterly	340	cankered
against	you,	to	give	you	such	a	harvest	of	evils?
And	yet	he	will	not	do	away	with	you,	for	all	his	anger.
But	do	as	I	say,	since	you	seem	to	me	not	lacking	in	good	sense.
Take	off	these	clothes,	and	leave	the	raft	to	drift	at	the	winds'	will,	and	then
strike	out	and	swim	with	your	hands	and	make	for	a	landfall	345	on	the
Phaiakian	country,	where	your	escape	is	destined.
And	here,	take	this	veil,	it	is	immortal,	and	fasten	it	under	your	chest;	and
there	is	no	need	for	you	to	die,	nor	to	suffer.
But	when	with	both	your	hands	you	have	taken	hold	of	the	mainland,	untie
the	veil	and	throw	it	out	in	the	wine-blue	water
350	far	from	the	land;	and	turn	your	face	away	as	you	do	so.’
So	spoke	the	goddess	and	handed	him	the	veil,	then	herself
in	the	likeness	of	a	gannet	slipped	back	into	the	heaving
sea,	and	the	dark	and	tossing	water	closed	above	her.
Now	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	pondered	two	courses,
355	and	troubled	he	spoke	then	to	his	own	great-hearted	spirit:	‘Ah	me,	which
of	the	immortals	is	weaving	deception
against	me,	and	tells	me	to	put	off	from	the	raft?	But	no,	I	will	not	do	it	yet,
since	I	have	seen	with	my	own	eyes
that	the	shore,	where	she	said	I	could	escape,	is	still	far	from	me.
360	But	here	is	what	I	will	do,	and	this	seems	to	me	the	best	way.
As	long	as	the	timbers	hold	together	and	the	construction
remains,	I	will	stay	with	it	and	endure	though	suffering	hardships;	but	once
the	heaving	sea	has	shaken	my	raft	to	pieces,
then	I	will	swim.	There	is	nothing	better	that	I	can	think	of.’
365	Now	as	he	was	pondering	these	ways	in	his	heart	and	spirit,	Poseidon,
shaker	of	the	earth,	drove	on	a	great	wave,	that	was	terrible	and	rough,	and
it	curled	over	and	broke	down	upon	him,	and	as	when	the	wind	blows
hard	on	a	dry	pile
of	chaff,	and	scatters	it	abroad	in	every	direction,
370	so	the	raft's	long	timbers	were	scattered,	but	now	Odysseus	sat	astride	one
beam,	like	a	man	riding	on	horseback,
Odysseus	aided	by	Athene
and	stripped	off	the	clothing	which	the	divine	Kalypso	had	given	him,	and
rapidly	tied	the	veil	of	Ino	around	his	chest,	then
threw	himself	head	first	in	the	water,	and	with	his	arms	spread	375	stroked
as	hard	as	he	could.	The	strong	Earthshaker	saw	him	swimming,	and	shook
his	head	and	spoke	to	his	own	spirit:
‘There,	now,	drift	on	the	open	sea,	suffering	much	trouble,	until	you	come
among	certain	people	who	are	the	gods'	fosterlings.
Even	so,	I	hope	you	will	not	complain	that	I	stinted	your	hardships.’
380	So	he	spoke,	and	laid	the	lash	on	his	fair-maned	horses,	and	made	his	way
to	
Aigai
,	where	he	has	his	fabulous	palace.
But	now	Athene,	daughter	of	Zeus,	planned	what	was	to	follow.
She	fastened	down	the	courses	of	all	the	rest	of	the	stormwinds,	and	told
them	all	to	go	to	sleep	now	and	to	give	over,
385	but	stirred	a	hastening	North	Wind,	and	broke	down	the	seas	before	him,
until	Zeus-sprung	Odysseus,	escaping	death	and	the	spirits	of	death,	might
join	the	company	of	oar-loving	Phaiakians.
Then	he	was	driven	two	nights	and	two	days	on	the	heavy
seas,	and	many	times	his	heart	foresaw	destruction,
390	but	when	Dawn	with	the	lovely	hair	had	brought	the	third	morning,	then
at	last	the	gale	went	down	and	windless	weather
came	on,	and	now	he	saw	the	land	lying	very	close	to	him
as	he	took	a	sharp	look,	lifted	high	on	the	top	of	a	great	wave.
And	as	welcome	as	the	show	of	life	again	in	a	father
395	is	to	his	children,	when	he	has	lain	sick,	suffering	strong	pains,	and
wasting	long	away,	and	the	hateful	death	spirit	has	brushed	him,	but	then,
and	it	is	welcome,	the	gods	set	him	free	of	his	sickness,	so	welcome
appeared	land	and	forest	now	to	Odysseus,
and	he	swam,	pressing	on,	so	as	to	set	foot	on	the	mainland.
400	But	when	he	was	as	far	away	as	a	voice	can	carry
he	heard	the	thumping	of	the	sea	on	the	jagged	rock-teeth,	for	a	big	surf,
terribly	sucked	up	from	the	main,	was	crashing	on	the	dry	land,	all	was
mantled	in	salt	spray,	and	there	were	no	harbors	to	hold	ships,	no
roadsteads	for	them	to	ride	in,	405	but	promontories	out-thrust	and	ragged
rock-teeth	and	boulders.
The	knees	of	Odysseus	gave	way	for	fear,	and	the	heart	inside	him,	and
deeply	troubled	he	spoke	to	his	own	great-hearted	spirit:	‘Ah	me,	now	that
Zeus	has	granted	a	sight	of	unhoped-for
land,	and	now	I	have	made	the	crossing	of	this	great	distance,	410	I	see	no
way	for	me	to	get	out	of	the	gray	sea	water,
barely	avoids	the	rocks
for	on	the	outer	side	are	sharp	rocks,	and	the	surf	about	them	breaks	and
roars,	and	the	sheer	of	the	cliff	runs	up	above	them,	and	the	sea	is	deep
close	in	shore	so	that	there	is	no	place	to	stand	bracing	on	both	my	feet	and
so	avoid	trouble.
415	I	fear	that	as	I	climb	out	a	great	wave	will	catch	and	throw	me	against	the
stony	cliff.	That	will	be	a	pitiful	landing.
Yet	if	I	try	to	swim	on	along	in	the	hope	of	finding
beaches	that	slant	against	the	waves	or	harbors	for	shelter	from	the	sea,	I
fear	that	once	again	the	whirlwind	will	snatch	me	420	and	carry	me	out	on
the	sea	where	the	fish	swarm,	groaning	heavily,	or	else	the	divinity	from
the	deep	will	let	loose	against	me	a	sea	monster,	of	whom	Amphitrite	keeps
so	many;
for	I	know	how	bitterly	the	renowned	Earthshaker	hates	me.’
Now	as	he	was	pondering	this	in	his	heart	and	spirit,
425	meanwhile	a	great	wave	carried	him	against	the	rough	rock	face,	and
there	his	skin	would	have	been	taken	off,	his	bones	crushed	together,	had
not	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	sent	him	an	inkling,
and	he	frantically	caught	hold	with	both	hands	on	the	rock	face	and	clung
to	it,	groaning,	until	the	great	wave	went	over.	This	one	430	he	so	escaped,
but	the	backwash	of	the	same	wave	caught	him	where	he	clung	and	threw
him	far	out	in	the	open	water.
As	when	an	octopus	is	dragged	away	from	its	shelter
the	thickly-clustered	pebbles	stick	in	the	cups	of	the	tentacles,	so	in	contact
with	the	rock	the	skin	from	his	bold	hands
435	was	torn	away.	Now	the	great	sea	covered	him	over,
and	Odysseus	would	have	perished,	wretched,	beyond	his	destiny,	had	not
the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	given	him	forethought.
He	got	clear	of	the	surf,	where	it	sucks	against	the	land,	and	swam	on
along,	looking	always	toward	the	shore	in	the	hope	of	finding	440	beaches
that	slanted	against	the	waves	or	harbors	for	shelter	from	the	sea,	but	when
he	came,	swimming	along,	to	the	mouth	of	a	sweet-running	river,	this	at
last	seemed	to	him	the	best	place,	being	bare	of	rocks,	and	there	was	even
shelter	from	the	wind	there.
He	saw	where	the	river	came	out	and	prayed	to	him	in	his	spirit:	445	‘Hear
me,	my	lord,	whoever	you	are.	I	come	in	great	need
to	you,	a	fugitive	from	the	sea	and	the	curse	of	Poseidon;	even	for
immortal	gods	that	man	has	a	claim	on	their	mercy	who	comes	to	them	as	a
wandering	man,	in	the	way	that	I	now	come	to	your	current	and	to	your
knees	after	much	suffering.
Odysseus	comes	ashore
450	Pity	me	then,	my	lord.	I	call	myself	your	suppliant.’
He	spoke,	and	the	river	stayed	his	current,	stopped	the	waves	breaking,
and	made	all	quiet	in	front	of	him	and	let	him	get	safely
into	the	outlet	of	the	river.	Now	he	flexed	both	knees
and	his	ponderous	hands;	his	very	heart	was	sick	with	salt	water,	455	and
all	his	flesh	was	swollen,	and	the	sea	water	crusted	stiffly	in	his	mouth	and
nostrils,	and	with	a	terrible	weariness	fallen	upon	him	he	lay	unable	to
breathe	or	speak	in	his	weakness.
But	when	he	got	his	breath	back	and	the	spirit	regathered	into	his	heart,	he
at	last	unbound	the	veil	of	the	goddess	from	him,	460	and	let	it	go,	to	drift
in	the	seaward	course	of	the	river,	and	the	great	wave	carried	it	out	on	the
current,	and	presently	Ino	took	it	back	into	her	hands.	Odysseus	staggered
from	the	river	and	lay	down	again	in	the	rushes	and	kissed	the	grain-giving
soil.
Then	deeply	troubled	he	spoke	to	his	own	great-hearted	spirit:	465	‘What
will	happen	now,	and	what	in	the	long	outcome	will	befall	me?
For	if	I	wait	out	the	uncomfortable	night	by	the	river,
I	fear	that	the	female	dew	and	the	evil	frost	together
will	be	too	much	for	my	damaged	strength,	I	am	so	exhausted,	and	in	the
morning	a	chilly	wind	will	blow	from	the	river;	470	but	if	I	go	up	the	slope
and	into	the	shadowy	forest,
and	lie	down	to	sleep	among	the	dense	bushes,	even	if	the	chill	and
weariness	let	me	be,	and	a	sweet	sleep	comes	upon	me,
I	fear	I	may	become	spoil	and	prey	to	the	wild	animals.’
In	the	division	of	his	heart	this	last	way	seemed	best,
475	and	he	went	to	look	for	the	wood	and	found	it	close	to	the	water	in	a
conspicuous	place,	and	stopped	underneath	two	bushes
that	grew	from	the	same	place,	one	of	shrub,	and	one	of	wild	olive,	and
neither	the	force	of	wet-blowing	winds	could	penetrate	these	nor	could	the
shining	sun	ever	strike	through	with	his	rays,	nor	yet	480	could	the	rain
pass	all	the	way	through	them,	so	close	together	were	they	grown,
interlacing	each	other;	and	under	these	now	Odysseus	entered,	and	with	his
own	hands	heaped	him	a	bed	to	sleep	on,	making	it	wide,	since	there	was
great	store	of	fallen	leaves	there,	enough	for	two	men	to	take	cover	in	or
even	three	men
485	in	the	winter	season,	even	in	the	very	worst	kind	of	weather.
Seeing	this,	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	was	happy,
and	lay	down	in	the	middle,	and	made	a	pile	of	leaves	over	him.
As	when	a	man	buries	a	burning	log	in	a	black	ash	heap
on	the	island	of	the	Phaiakians
in	a	remote	place	in	the	country,	where	none	live	near	as	neighbors,	490
and	saves	the	seed	of	fire,	having	no	other	place	to	get	a	light	from,	so
Odysseus	buried	himself	in	the	leaves,	and	Athene	shed	a	sleep	on	his	eyes
so	as	most	quickly	to	quit	him,
by	veiling	his	eyes,	from	the	exhaustion	of	his	hard	labors.
BOOK	VI
So	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	slept	in	that	place
in	an	exhaustion	of	sleep	and	weariness,	and	now	Athene
went	her	way	to	the	district	and	city	of	the	Phaiakian
men,	who	formerly	lived	in	the	spacious	land,	
Hypereia
,	5	next	to	the
Cyclopes,	who	were	men	too	overbearing,
and	who	had	kept	harrying	them,	being	greater	in	strength.	From	here
godlike	
Nausithoös
	had	removed	and	led	a	migration,	and	settled	in
Scheria,	far	away	from	men	who	eat	bread,	and	driven	a	wall	about	the
city,	and	built	the	houses,
10	and	made	the	temples	of	the	gods,	and	allotted	the	holdings.
But	now	he	had	submitted	to	his	fate,	and	gone	to	Hades',	and	
Alkinoös
,
learned	in	designs	from	the	gods,	now	ruled	there.
It	was	to	his	house	that	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene
went,	devising	the	homecoming	of	great-hearted	Odysseus,	15	and	she
went	into	the	ornate	chamber,	in	which	a	girl
was	sleeping,	like	the	immortal	goddesses	for	stature	and	beauty,	
Nausikaa
,
the	daughter	of	great-hearted	Alkinoös,	and	beside	her	two	handmaidens
with	beauty	given	from	the	
Graces
slept	on	either	side	of	the	post	with	the	shining	doors	closed.
20	She	drifted	in	like	a	breath	of	wind	to	where	the	girl	slept,	and	came	and
stood	above	her	head	and	spoke	a	word	to	her,	likening	herself	to	the
daughter	of	
Dymas
,	famed	for	seafaring,	a	girl	of	the	same	age,	in	whom
her	fancy	delighted.
In	this	likeness	the	gray-eyed	Athene	spoke	to	her:
Nausikaa	is	inspired	to	go	and	wash	the	clothes
25	‘Nausikaa,	how	could	your	mother	have	a	child	so	careless?
The	shining	clothes	are	lying	away	uncared	for,	while	your	marriage	is	not
far	off,	when	you	should	be	in	your	glory	for	clothes	to	wear,	and	provide
too	for	those	who	attend	you.
It	is	from	such	things	that	a	good	reputation	among	people	30	springs	up,
giving	pleasure	to	your	father	and	the	lady	your	mother.
So	let	us	go	on	a	washing	tomorrow	when	dawn	shows.	I	too	will	go	along
with	you	and	help	you,	so	you	can	have	all	done	most	quickly,	since	you
will	not	long	stay	unmarried.
For	already	you	are	being	courted	by	all	the	best	men
35	of	the	Phaiakians	hereabouts,	and	you	too	are	a	Phaiakian.
So	come,	urge	your	famous	father	early	in	the	morning
to	harness	the	mules	and	wagon	for	you,	and	it	shall	carry	the	sashes	and
dresses	and	shining	coverlets	for	you.	In	this	way	it	will	be	so	much	more
becoming	than	for	you	to	go	there	40	on	foot,	for	the	washing	places	are	a
long	way	from	the	city.’
So	the	gray-eyed	Athene	spoke	and	went	away	from	her
to	Olympos,	where	the	abode	of	the	gods	stands	firm	and	unmoving
forever,	they	say,	and	is	not	shaken	with	winds	nor	spattered	with	rains,	nor
does	snow	pile	ever	there,	but	the	shining	bright	air	45	stretches	cloudless
away,	and	the	white	light	glances	upon	it.
And	there,	and	all	their	days,	the	blessed	gods	take	their	pleasure.
There	the	Gray-eyed	One	went,	when	she	had	talked	with	the	young	girl.
And	the	next	the	Dawn	came,	throned	in	splendor,	and	wakened	the
well-robed	girl	Nausikaa,	and	she	wondered	much	at	her	dreaming,
50	and	went	through	the	house,	so	as	to	give	the	word	to	her	parents,	to	her
dear	father	and	her	mother.	She	found	them	within	there;	the	queen	was
sitting	by	the	fireside	with	her	attendant	women,	turning	sea-purple	yarn
on	a	distaff;	her	father
she	met	as	he	was	going	out	the	door	to	the	council
55	of	famed	barons,	where	the	proud	Phaiakians	used	to	summon	him.
She	stood	very	close	up	to	her	dear	father	and	spoke	to	him:	‘Daddy	dear,
will	you	not	have	them	harness	me	the	wagon,	the	high	one	with	the	good
wheels,	so	that	I	can	take	the	clothing	to	the	river	and	wash	it?	Now	it	is
lying	about,	all	dirty,	60	and	you	yourself,	when	you	sit	among	the	first
men	in	council	and	share	their	counsels,	ought	to	have	clean	clothing	about
you;	and	also,	you	have	five	dear	sons	who	are	grown	in	the	palace,
Odysseus	wakened	by	Nausikaa
two	of	them	married,	and	other	three	are	sprightly	bachelors,	and	they	are
forever	wanting	clean	fresh	clothing,	to	wear	it	65	when	they	go	to	dance,
and	it	is	my	duty	to	think	about	all	this.’
So	she	spoke,	but	she	was	ashamed	to	speak	of	her	joyful
marriage	to	her	dear	father,	but	he	understood	all	and	answered:	‘I	do	not
begrudge	you	the	mules,	child,	nor	anything
else.	So	go,	and	the	serving	men	will	harness	the	wagon,	70	the	high	one
with	the	good	wheels	that	has	the	carrying	basket.’
He	spoke,	and	gave	the	order	to	the	serving	men.	These	obeyed,
and	brought	the	mule	wagon	with	good	wheels	outside	and	put	it	together,
and	led	the	mules	under	the	yoke	and	harnessed	them,	and	the	girl	brought
the	bright	clothing	out	from	the	inner	chamber	75	and	laid	it	in	the	well-
polished	wagon.	Meanwhile	her	mother	put	in	a	box	all	manner	of	food,
which	would	preserve	strength,	and	put	many	good	things	to	eat	with	it,
and	poured	out
wine	in	a	goatskin	bottle,	and	her	daughter	put	that	in	the	wagon.
She	gave	her	limpid	olive	oil	in	a	golden	oil	flask
80	for	her	and	her	attendant	women	to	use	for	anointing.
Nausikaa	took	up	the	whip	and	the	shining	reins,	then
whipped	them	into	a	start	and	the	mules	went	noisily	forward	and	pulled
without	stint,	carrying	the	girl	and	the	clothing.
She	was	not	alone.	The	rest,	her	handmaidens,	walked	on	beside	her.
85	Now	when	they	had	come	to	the	delightful	stream	of	the	river,	where	there
was	always	a	washing	place,	and	plenty	of	glorious	water	that	ran	through
to	wash	what	was	ever	so	dirty,
there	they	unyoked	the	mules	and	set	them	free	from	the	wagon,	and
chased	them	out	along	the	bank	of	the	swirling	river	90	to	graze	on	the
sweet	river	grass,	while	they	from	the	wagon	lifted	the	wash	in	their	hands
and	carried	it	to	the	black	water,	and	stamped	on	it	in	the	basins,	making	a
race	and	game	of	it	until	they	had	washed	and	rinsed	all	dirt	away,	then
spread	it	out	in	line	along	the	beach	of	the	sea,	where	the	water
95	of	the	sea	had	washed	the	most	big	pebbles	up	on	the	dry	shore.
Then	they	themselves,	after	bathing	and	anointing	themselves	with	olive
oil,	ate	their	dinner	all	along	by	the	banks	of	the	river
and	waited	for	the	laundry	to	dry	out	in	the	sunshine.
But	when	she	and	her	maids	had	taken	their	pleasure	in	eating,	100	they	all
threw	off	their	veils	for	a	game	of	ball,	and	among	them
and	the	girls	at	play
it	was	Nausikaa	of	the	white	arms	who	led	in	the	dancing;	and	as	
Artemis
,
who	showers	arrows,	moves	on	the	mountains	either	along	
Taÿgetos
	or	on
high-towering	
Erymanthos
,	delighting	in	boars	and	deer	in	their	running,
105	and	along	with	her	the	nymphs,	daughters	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis,	range
in	the	wilds	and	play,	and	the	heart	of	
Leto
	is	gladdened,	for	the	head	and
the	brows	of	Artemis	are	above	all	the	others,	and	she	is	easily	marked
among	them,	though	all	are	lovely,	so	this	one	shone	among	her
handmaidens,	a	virgin	unwedded.
110	But	now,	when	she	was	about	ready	once	more	to	harness
the	mules,	and	fold	the	splendid	clothing,	and	start	on	the	way	home,	then
the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	thought	what	to	do	next;	how	Odysseus
should	awake,	and	see	the	well-favored	young	girl,	and	she	should	be	his
guide	to	the	city	of	the	Phaiakians.
115	Now	the	princess	threw	the	ball	toward	one	handmaiden,
and	missed	the	girl,	and	the	ball	went	into	the	swirling	water,	and	they	all
cried	out	aloud,	and	noble	Odysseus	wakened	and	sat	up	and	began
pondering	in	his	heart	and	his	spirit:	‘Ah	me,	what	are	the	people	whose
land	I	have	come	to	this	time,	120	and	are	they	violent	and	savage,	and
without	justice,
or	hospitable	to	strangers,	with	a	godly	mind?	See	now
how	an	outcry	of	young	women	echoes	about	me,
of	nymphs,	who	keep	the	sudden	and	sheer	high	mountain	places	and
springs	of	the	rivers	and	grass	of	the	meadows,	or	am	I	truly	125	in	the
neighborhood	of	human	people	I	can	converse	with?
But	come	now,	I	myself	shall	see	what	I	can	discover.’
So	speaking,	great	Odysseus	came	from	under	his	thicket,
and	from	the	dense	foliage	with	his	heavy	hand	he	broke	off	a	leafy	branch
to	cover	his	body	and	hide	the	male	parts,	130	and	went	in	the	confidence
of	his	strength,	like	some	hill-kept	lion,	who	advances,	though	he	is	rained
on	and	blown	by	the	wind,	and	both	eyes	kindle;	he	goes	out	after	cattle	or
sheep,	or	it	may	be
deer	in	the	wilderness,	and	his	belly	is	urgent	upon	him	to	get	inside	of	a
close	steading	and	go	for	the	sheepflocks.
135	So	Odysseus	was	ready	to	face	young	girls	with	well-ordered	hair,	naked
though	he	was,	for	the	need	was	on	him;	and	yet	he	appeared	terrifying	to
them,	all	crusted	with	dry	spray,	and	they	scattered	one	way	and	another
down	the	jutting	beaches.
Odysseus	supplicates	Nausikaa
Only	the	daughter	of	Alkinoös	stood	fast,	for	Athene
140	put	courage	into	her	heart,	and	took	the	fear	from	her	body,	and	she	stood
her	ground	and	faced	him,	and	now	Odysseus	debated	whether	to
supplicate	the	well-favored	girl	by	clasping
her	knees,	or	stand	off	where	he	was	and	in	words	of	blandishment	ask	if
she	would	show	him	the	city,	and	lend	him	clothing.
145	Then	in	the	division	of	his	heart	this	way	seemed	best	to	him,	to	stand
well	off	and	supplicate	in	words	of	blandishment,	for	fear	that,	if	he
clasped	her	knees,	the	girl	might	be	angry.
So	blandishingly	and	full	of	craft	he	began	to	address	her:	‘I	am	at	your
knees,	O	queen.	But	are	you	mortal	or	goddess?
150	If	indeed	you	are	one	of	the	gods	who	hold	wide	heaven,	then	I	must	find
in	you	the	nearest	likeness	to	Artemis
the	daughter	of	great	Zeus,	for	beauty,	figure,	and	stature.
But	if	you	are	one	among	those	mortals	who	live	in	this	country,	three
times	blessed	are	your	father	and	the	lady	your	mother,	155	and	three	times
blessed	your	brothers	too,	and	I	know	their	spirits	are	warmed	forever	with
happiness	at	the	thought	of	you,	seeing	such	a	slip	of	beauty	taking	her
place	in	the	chorus	of	dancers;	but	blessed	at	the	heart,	even	beyond	these
others,	is	that	one	who,	after	loading	you	down	with	gifts,	leads	you	as	his
bride	160	home.	I	have	never	with	these	eyes	seen	anything	like	you,
neither	man	nor	woman.	Wonder	takes	me	as	I	look	on	you.
Yet	in	
Delos
	once	I	saw	such	a	thing,	by	Apollo's	altar.
I	saw	the	stalk	of	a	young	palm	shooting	up.	I	had	gone	there	once,	and
with	a	following	of	a	great	many	people,
165	on	that	journey	which	was	to	mean	hard	suffering	for	me.
And	as,	when	I	looked	upon	that	tree,	my	heart	admired	it	long,	since	such
a	tree	had	never	yet	sprung	from	the	earth,	so	now,	lady,	I	admire	you	and
wonder,	and	am	terribly
afraid	to	clasp	you	by	the	knees.	The	hard	sorrow	is	on	me.
170	Yesterday	on	the	twentieth	day	I	escaped	the	wine-blue
sea;	until	then	the	current	and	the	tearing	winds	had	swept	me	along	from
the	island	Ogygia,	and	my	fate	has	landed	me
here;	here	too	I	must	have	evil	to	suffer;	I	do	not
think	it	will	stop;	before	then	the	gods	have	much	to	give	me.
175	Then	have	pity,	O	queen.	You	are	the	first	I	have	come	to	after	much
suffering,	there	is	no	one	else	that	I	know	of	here	among	the	people	who
hold	this	land	and	this	city.
who	receives	him	kindly
Show	me	the	way	to	the	town	and	give	me	some	rag	to	wrap	me	in,	if	you
had	any	kind	of	piece	of	cloth	when	you	came	here,	180	and	then	may	the
gods	give	you	everything	that	your	heart	longs	for;	may	they	grant	you	a
husband	and	a	house	and	sweet	agreement	in	all	things,	for	nothing	is
better	than	this,	more	steadfast	than	when	two	people,	a	man	and	his	wife,
keep	a	harmonious	household;	a	thing	that	brings	much	distress	to	the
people	who	hate	them	185	and	pleasure	to	their	well-wishers,	and	for	them
the	best	reputation.’
Then	in	turn	Nausikaa	of	the	white	arms	answered	him:
‘My	friend,	since	you	seem	not	like	a	thoughtless	man,	nor	a	mean	one,	it
is	Zeus	himself,	the	Olympian,	who	gives	people	good	fortune,	to	each
single	man,	to	the	good	and	the	bad,	just	as	he	wishes;	190	and	since	he
must	have	given	you	yours,	you	must	even	endure	it.
But	now,	since	it	is	our	land	and	our	city	that	you	have	come	to,	you	shall
not	lack	for	clothing	nor	anything	else,	of	those	gifts	which	should	befall
the	unhappy	suppliant	on	his	arrival;	and	I	will	show	you	our	town,	and	tell
you	the	name	of	our	people.
195	It	is	the	Phaiakians	who	hold	this	territory	and	city,
and	I	myself	am	the	daughter	of	great-hearted	Alkinoös,
whose	power	and	dominion	are	held	by	right,	given	from	the	Phaiakians.’
She	spoke,	and	to	her	attendants	with	well-ordered	hair	gave
instruction:	‘Stand	fast,	girls.	Where	are	you	flying,	just	because	you	have
looked	on	200	a	man?	Do	you	think	this	is	some	enemy	coming	against	us?
There	is	no	such	man	living	nor	can	there	ever	be	one
who	can	come	into	the	land	of	the	Phaiakians	bringing
warlike	attack;	we	are	so	very	dear	to	the	immortals,
and	we	live	far	apart	by	ourselves	in	the	wash	of	the	great	sea	205	at	the
utter	end,	nor	do	any	other	people	mix	with	us.
But,	since	this	is	some	poor	wanderer	who	has	come	to	us,	we	must	now
take	care	of	him,	since	all	strangers	and	wanderers	are	sacred	in	the	sight
of	Zeus,	and	the	gift	is	a	light	and	a	dear	one.
So,	my	attendants,	give	some	food	and	drink	to	the	stranger,	210
and	bathe	him,	where	there	is	shelter	from	the	wind,	in	the	river.’
She	spoke,	and	they	stopped	their	flight,	encouraging	each	other,	and
led	Odysseus	down	to	the	sheltered	place,	as	Nausikaa	daughter	of	great-
hearted	Alkinoös	had	told	them
to	do,	and	laid	out	for	him	to	wear	a	mantle	and	tunic,
215	and	gave	him	limpid	olive	oil	in	a	golden	oil	flask,
Athene	glorifies	Odysseus
and	told	him	he	could	bathe	himself	in	the	stream	of	the	river.
Then	the	glorious	Odysseus	spoke	to	these	serving	maids:	‘Stand	as	you
are,	girls,	a	little	away	from	me,	so	that	I	can	wash	the	salt	off	my
shoulders	and	use	the	olive	oil	220	on	them.	It	is	long	since	my	skin	has
known	any	ointment.
But	I	will	not	bathe	in	front	of	you,	for	I	feel	embarrassed	in	the	presence
of	lovely-haired	girls	to	appear	all	naked.’
He	spoke,	and	they	went	away	and	told	it	to	their	young	mistress.
But	when	great	Odysseus	had	bathed	in	the	river	and	washed	from	his
body	225	the	salt	brine,	which	clung	to	his	back	and	his	broad	shoulders,
he	scraped	from	his	head	the	scurf	of	brine	from	the	barren	salt	sea.
But	when	he	had	bathed	all,	and	anointed	himself	with	olive	oil,	and	put	on
the	clothing	this	unwedded	girl	had	given	him,	then	Athene,	daughter	of
Zeus,	made	him	seem	taller
230	for	the	eye	to	behold,	and	thicker,	and	on	his	head	she	arranged	the
curling	locks	that	hung	down	like	hyacinthine	petals.
And	as	when	a	master	craftsman	overlays	gold	on	silver,
and	he	is	one	who	was	taught	by	Hephaistos	and	Pallas	Athene	in	art
complete,	and	grace	is	on	every	work	he	finishes,	235	so	Athene	gilded
with	grace	his	head	and	his	shoulders,	and	he	went	a	little	aside	and	sat	by
himself	on	the	seashore,	radiant	in	grace	and	good	looks;	and	the	girl
admired	him.
It	was	to	her	attendants	with	well-ordered	hair	that	she	now	spoke:	‘Hear
me,	my	white-armed	serving	women;	let	me	say	something.
240	It	is	not	against	the	will	of	all	the	gods	on	Olympos
that	this	man	is	here	to	be	made	known	to	the	godlike	Phaiakians.
A	while	ago	he	seemed	an	unpromising	man	to	me.	Now
he	even	resembles	one	of	the	gods,	who	hold	high	heaven.
If	only	the	man	to	be	called	my	husband	could	be	like	this	one,	245	a	man
living	here,	if	only	this	one	were	pleased	to	stay	here.
But	come,	my	attendants,	give	some	food	and	drink	to	the	stranger.’
So	she	spoke,	and	they	listened	well	to	her	and	obeyed	her,
and	they	set	food	and	drink	down	beside	Odysseus.	He	then,	noble	and
long-suffering	Odysseus,	eagerly
250	ate	and	drank,	since	he	had	not	tasted	food	for	a	long	time.
Then	Nausikaa	of	the	white	arms	thought	what	to	do	next.
She	folded	the	laundry	and	put	it	away	in	the	fine	mule	wagon,	and	yoked
the	mules	with	powerful	hooves,	and	herself	mounted,
and	Nausikaa	is	impressed
and	urged	Odysseus	and	spoke	a	word	and	named	him	by	title:	255	‘Rise
up	now,	stranger,	to	go	to	the	city,	so	I	can	see	you	to	the	house	of	my	own
prudent	father,	where	I	am	confident	you	will	be	made	known	to	all	the
highest	Phaiakians.
Or	rather,	do	it	this	way;	you	seem	to	me	not	to	be	thoughtless.
While	we	are	still	among	the	fields	and	the	lands	that	the	people	260	work,
for	that	time	follow	the	mules	and	the	wagon,	walking	lightly	along	with
the	maids,	and	I	will	point	the	way	to	you.
But	when	we	come	to	the	city,	and	around	this	is	a	towering	wall,	and	a
handsome	harbor	either	side	of	the	city,
and	a	narrow	causeway,	and	along	the	road	there	are	oarswept	265	ships
drawn	up,	for	they	all	have	slips,	one	for	each	vessel;	and	there	is	the	place
of	assembly,	put	together	with	quarried	stone,	and	built	around	a	fine
precinct	of	Poseidon,
and	there	they	tend	to	all	that	gear	that	goes	with	the	black	ships,	the
hawsers	and	the	sails,	and	there	they	fine	down	their	oarblades;	270	for	the
Phaiakians	have	no	concern	with	the	bow	or	the	quiver,	but	it	is	all	masts
and	the	oars	of	ships	and	the	balanced	vessels	themselves,	in	which	they
delight	in	crossing	over	the	gray	sea;	and	it	is	their	graceless	speech	I
shrink	from,	for	fear	one	may	mock	us	hereafter,	since	there	are	insolent
men	in	our	community,	275	and	see	how	one	of	the	worse	sort	might	say
when	he	met	us,	“Who	is	this	large	and	handsome	stranger	whom	Nausikaa
has	with	her,	and	where	did	she	find	him?	Surely,	he	is
to	be	her	husband,	but	is	he	a	stray	from	some	ship	of	alien	men	she	found
for	herself,	since	there	are	no	such	hereabouts?
280	Or	did	some	god	after	much	entreaty	come	down	in	answer	to	her	prayers,
out	of	the	sky,	and	all	his	days	will	he	have	her?
Better	so,	if	she	goes	out	herself	and	finds	her	a	husband	from	elsewhere,
since	she	pays	no	heed	to	her	own	Phaiakian	neighbors,	although	many	of
these	and	the	best	ones	court	her.”
285	So	they	will	speak,	and	that	would	be	a	scandal	against	me,	and	I	myself
would	disapprove	of	a	girl	who	acted
so,	that	is,	without	the	good	will	of	her	dear	father
and	mother	making	friends	with	a	man,	before	being	formally	married.
Then,	stranger,	understand	what	I	say,	in	order	290	soon	to	win	escort	and
a	voyage	home	from	my	father.
You	will	find	a	glorious	grove	of	poplars	sacred	to	Athene	near	the	road,
and	a	spring	runs	there,	and	there	is	a	meadow
Odysseus	and	Nausikaa	return	to	the	city
about	it,	and	there	is	my	father's	estate	and	his	flowering	orchard,	as	far
from	the	city	as	the	shout	of	a	man	will	carry.
295	Sit	down	there	and	wait	for	time	enough	for	the	rest	of	us	to	reach	the
town	and	make	our	way	to	my	father's	palace.
But	when	you	estimate	that	we	shall	have	reached	the	palace,	then	go	to
the	city	of	the	Phaiakians	and	inquire	for
the	palace	of	my	father,	great-hearted	Alkinoös.	This	is	300	easily
distinguished,	so	an	innocent	child	could	guide	you	there,	for	there	are	no
other	houses	built	for	the	other	Phaiakians	anything	like	the	house	of	the
hero	Alkinoös.
But	when	you	have	disappeared	inside	the	house	and	the	courtyard,	then	go
on	quickly	across	the	hall	until	you	come	to
305	my	mother,	and	she	will	be	sitting	beside	the	hearth,	in	the	firelight,
turning	sea-purple	yarn	on	a	distaff,	a	wonder	to	look	at,	and	leaning
against	the	pillar,	and	her	maids	are	sitting	behind	her;	and	there	is	my
father's	chair	of	state,	drawn	close	beside	her,	on	which	he	sits	when	he
drinks	his	wine	like	any	immortal.
310	Go	on	past	him	and	then	with	your	arms	embrace	our	mother's	knees;	do
this,	so	as	to	behold	your	day	of	homecoming
with	happiness	and	speed,	even	if	you	live	very	far	off.
For	if	she	has	thoughts	in	her	mind	that	are	friendly	to	you,	then	there	is
hope	that	you	can	see	your	own	people,	and	come	back	315	to	your	strong-
founded	house,	and	to	the	land	of	your	fathers.’
So	Nausikaa	spoke	and	with	the	shining	lash	whipped	up
her	mules,	and	swiftly	they	left	the	running	river	behind	them,	and	the
mules,	neatly	twinkling	their	feet,	ran	very	strongly,	but	she	drove	them
with	care,	so	that	those	on	foot,	Odysseus	320	and	the	serving	maids,	could
keep	up,	and	used	the	whip	with	discretion.
And	the	sun	went	down	and	they	came	to	the	famous	grove,	sacred	to
Athene;	and	there	the	great	Odysseus	sat	down
and	immediately	thereafter	prayed	to	the	daughter	of	great	Zeus:	‘Hear	me,
Atrytone	child	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis,
325	and	listen	to	me	now,	since	before	you	did	not	listen
to	my	stricken	voice	as	the	famous	shaker	of	the	earth	battered	me.
Grant	that	I	come,	as	one	loved	and	pitied,	among	the	Phaiakians.’
So	he	spoke	in	prayer,	and	Pallas	Athene	heard	him,
but	she	did	not	yet	show	herself	before	him,	for	she	respected	330	her
father's	brother,	Poseidon,	who	still	nursed	a	sore	anger	at	godlike
Odysseus	until	his	arrival	in	his	own	country.
BOOK	VII
So	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	prayed,	in	that	place,
but	the	strength	of	the	mules	carried	the	young	girl	on,	to	the	city,	and
when	she	had	arrived	at	the	glorious	house	of	her	father,	she	stopped	in	the
forecourt,	and	there	her	brothers	around	her	5	came	and	stood,	men	like
immortal	gods.	They	from
the	mule	wagon	unyoked	the	mules	and	carried	the	laundry	inside,	and	she
went	into	her	chamber.	There	an	old	woman	of	
Apeire
,	
Eurymedousa
	the
chamber	attendant,	lighted	a	fire	for	her.	Oarswept	ships	once	carried	her
over
10	from	Apeire,	and	they	chose	her	out	as	a	prize	for	Alkinoös	because	he
ruled	all	the	Phaiakians	and	the	people	listened,	as	to	a	god.	She	had
nursed	white-armed	Nausikaa	in	the	palace.
Now	she	lit	her	a	fire,	and	prepared	her	a	supper,	indoors.
Then	Odysseus	rose	to	go	to	the	city.	Athene
15	with	kind	thought	for	Odysseus	drifted	a	deep	mist	about	him,	for	fear
some	one	of	the	great-hearted	Phaiakians,	meeting	him,	might	speak	to
him	in	a	sneering	way	and	ask	where	he	came	from.
But	when	he	was	about	to	enter	the	lovely	city,
there	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	met	him,	in	the	likeness	20	of	a	young
girl,	a	little	maid,	carrying	a	pitcher,
and	she	came	and	stood	before	him	and	great	Odysseus	questioned	her:
‘My	child,	would	you	not	show	me	the	way	to	the	house	of	a	certain	man,
Alkinoös,	who	is	lord	over	all	these	people?
For	I	am	an	unhappy	stranger,	and	I	have	come	here
Athene	in	disguise	informs	Odysseus
25	a	long	way	from	a	distant	land,	and	I	know	nobody
here	of	the	people	who	keep	this	city	and	the	fields	about	it.’
Then	in	turn	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	answered	him:
‘Then,	my	friend	and	father,	I	will	show	you	the	house	that	you	ask	me	to
show,	since	the	king	lives	close	beside	my	own	stately	father.
30	But	go	on	in	silence	the	while	I	lead	the	way	for	you,	and	do	not	give	any
of	these	people	your	eye,	neither	ask	them	questions,	for	they	do	not	have
very	much	patience	with	men	from	the	outlands,	nor	do	they	lovingly
entertain	the	man	come	from	elsewhere;	they,	confident	in	the	speed	of
their	running	ships,	cross	over	35	the	great	open	water,	since	this	is	the
gift	of	the	Earthshaker	to	them,	whose	ships	move	swift	as	thought,	or	as	a
winged	creature.’
So	spoke	Pallas	Athene	and	she	led	the	way	swiftly,
and	the	man	followed	behind	her	walking	in	the	god's	footsteps;	but	the
Phaiakians	famed	for	seafaring	were	not	aware	of	him	40	as	he	walked
among	them	through	their	city,	because	Athene	of	the	ordered	hair,	a	dread
goddess,	would	not	suffer	them	to,	but	drifted	a	magical	mist	about	him,	as
she	cared	for	him	lovingly.
But	Odysseus	now	admired	their	balanced	ships	and	their	harbors,	the
meeting	places	of	the	heroes	themselves	and	the	long	lofty	45	walls	that
were	joined	with	palisades,	a	wonder	to	look	at.
But	when	they	came	to	the	king's	glorious	palace,	then	it	was	Pallas
Athene,	the	gray-eyed	goddess,	who	began	speaking:	‘Here,	my	friend	and
father,	you	see	the	house	which	you	asked	me	to	tell	you	of.	Here	you	will
find	the	kings	whom	the	gods	love	50	busy	feasting,	but	you	go	on	in	with
a	spirit	that	fears	nothing.	The	bold	man	proves	the	better	for	every	action
in	the	end,	even	though	he	be	a	stranger	coming	from	elsewhere.
First	of	all	you	will	find	the	mistress	there	in	her	palace.
Arete
	is	the	name	she	is	called,	and	she	comes	of	the	same	55	forebears	as
in	fact	produced	the	king	Alkinoös.
First	of	all	Poseidon,	shaker	of	the	earth,	and	the	fairest	in	form	of	women,
Periboia
,	had	a	son	Nausithoös.
She	was	the	youngest	daughter	of	great-hearted	
Eurymedon
,	who	in	his
time	had	been	king	over	the	high-hearted	Giants.
60	But	he	lost	his	recklessly	daring	people	and	himself	perished,	but	Poseidon
lay	in	love	with	his	daughter,	and	she	engendered	Nausithoös	the	great-
hearted,	who	was	lord	over	the	Phaiakians.
Nausithoös	had	children,	Alkinoös	and	
Rhexenor
,
The	palace	of	Alkinoös
but	Apollo	of	the	silver	bow	then	struck	down	Rhexenor,
65	married	but	without	sons	in	his	hall,	leaving	only	the	one	child	Arete,	and
Alkinoös	made	her	his	wife,	and	gave	her
such	pride	of	place	as	no	other	woman	on	earth	is	given
of	such	women	as	are	now	alive	and	keep	house	for	husbands.
So	she	was	held	high	in	the	heart	and	still	she	is	so,
70	by	her	beloved	children,	by	Alkinoös	himself,	and	by
the	people,	who	look	toward	her	as	to	a	god	when	they	see	her,	and	speak
in	salutation	as	she	walks	about	in	her	city.
For	there	is	no	good	intelligence	that	she	herself	lacks.
She	dissolves	quarrels,	even	among	men,	when	she	favors	them.
75	So	if	she	has	thoughts	in	her	mind	that	are	friendly	to	you,	then	there	is
hope	that	you	can	see	your	own	people,	and	come	back	to	your	house	with
the	high	roof	and	to	the	land	of	your	fathers.’
So	gray-eyed	Athene	spoke	and	went	away	from	him
across	the	barren	and	open	water,	left	lovely	Scheria
80	and	came	to	
Marathon
	and	to	Athens	of	the	wide	ways,	and	entered	the
close-built	house	of	
Erechtheus
.	But	now	Odysseus	came	to	the	famous
house	of	Alkinoös,	but	the	heart	pondered	much	in	him	as	he	stood	before
coming	to	the	bronze	threshold.
For	as	from	the	sun	the	light	goes	or	from	the	moon,	such	was	85	the	glory
on	the	high-roofed	house	of	great-hearted	Alkinoös.
Brazen	were	the	walls	run	about	it	in	either	direction
from	the	inner	room	to	the	door,	with	a	cobalt	frieze	encircling,	and	golden
were	the	doors	that	guarded	the	close	of	the	palace,	and	silver	were	the
pillars	set	in	the	brazen	threshold,	90	and	there	was	a	silver	lintel	above,
and	a	golden	handle,	and	dogs	made	out	of	gold	and	silver	were	on	each
side	of	it,	fashioned	by	Hephaistos	in	his	craftsmanship	and	cunning,	to
watch	over	the	palace	of	great-hearted	Alkinoös,
being	themselves	immortal,	and	all	their	days	they	are	ageless.
95	And	within,	thrones	were	backed	against	the	wall	on	both	sides	all	the	way
from	the	inner	room	to	the	door,	with	fine-spun	delicate	cloths,	the	work
of	women,	spread	out	upon	them.
There	the	leaders	of	the	Phaiakians	held	their	sessions
and	drank	and	ate,	since	they	held	these	forever,	and	there	were	100	young
men	fashioned	all	of	gold	and	in	their	hands	holding	flaring	torches	who
stood	on	the	strong-compounded	bases,	and	shed	a	gleam	through	the
house	by	night,	to	shine	on	the	feasters.
The	palace	of	Alkinoös
And	in	his	house	are	fifty	serving	women,	and	of	these
some	grind	the	apple-colored	grain	at	the	turn	of	the	hand	mill,	105	and
there	are	those	who	weave	the	webs	and	who	turn	the	distaffs,	sitting
restless	as	leaves	of	the	tall	black	poplar,	and	from	the	cloths	where	it	is
sieved	oozes	the	limpid	olive	oil.
As	much	as	Phaiakian	men	are	expert	beyond	all	others
for	driving	a	fast	ship	on	the	open	sea,	so	their	women
110	are	skilled	in	weaving	and	dowered	with	wisdom	bestowed	by	Athene,	to
be	expert	in	beautiful	work,	to	have	good	character.
On	the	outside	of	the	courtyard	and	next	the	doors	is	his	orchard,	a	great
one,	four	land	measures,	with	a	fence	driven	all	around	it,	and	there	is	the
place	where	his	fruit	trees	are	grown	tall	and	flourishing,	115	pear	trees	and
pomegranate	trees	and	apple	trees	with	their	shining	fruit,	and	the	sweet	fig
trees	and	the	flourishing	olive.
Never	is	the	fruit	spoiled	on	these,	never	does	it	give	out,	neither	in	winter
time	nor	summer,	but	always	the	West	Wind	blowing	on	the	fruits	brings
some	to	ripeness	while	he	starts	others.
120	Pear	matures	on	pear	in	that	place,	apple	upon	apple,
grape	cluster	on	grape	cluster,	fig	upon	fig.	There	also	he	has	a	vineyard
planted	that	gives	abundant	produce,
some	of	it	a	warm	area	on	level	ground	where	the	grapes	are	left	to	dry	in
the	sun,	but	elsewhere	they	are	gathering	others	125	and	trampling	out	yet
others,	and	in	front	of	these	are	unripe	grapes	that	have	cast	off	their	bloom
while	others	are	darkening.
And	there	at	the	bottom	strip	of	the	field	are	growing	orderly	rows	of
greens,	all	kinds,	and	these	are	lush	through	the	seasons;	and	there	two
springs	distribute	water,	one	through	all	the	garden	130	space,	and	one	on
the	other	side	jets	out	by	the	courtyard	door,	and	the	lofty	house,	where
townspeople	come	for	their	water.
Such	are	the	glorious	gifts	of	the	gods	at	the	house	of	Alkinoös.
And	there	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	stopped	still	and	admired	it.
But	when	his	mind	was	done	with	all	admiration,	lightly
135	he	stepped	over	the	threshold	and	went	on	into	the	palace,	and	there	found
the	leaders	of	the	Phaiakians	and	men	of	counsel	pouring	libation	in	cups
to	sharp-eyed	Argeïphontes
to	whom	they	always	poured	the	last	drink,	when	mindful	of	bedtime.
But	now	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	went	on	through	the	house,	140
wearing	still	the	deep	mist	that	Athene	had	drifted	about	him,
Odysseus	supplicates	the	Phaiakians
until	he	came	to	Arete	and	to	the	king,	Alkinoös.
Odysseus	clasped	Arete's	knees	in	his	arms,	and	at	that	time	the	magical
and	surrounding	mist	was	drifted	from	him,
and	all	fell	silent	through	the	house	when	they	saw	the	man	there,	145	and
they	wondered	looking	on	him,	and	Odysseus	made	his	entreaty:	‘Arete,
daughter	of	godlike	Rhexenor,	after	much	hardship	I	have	come	to	your
knees	as	a	suppliant,	and	to	your	husband	and	to	these	feasters,	on	whom
may	the	gods	bestow	prosperity	in	their	own	lives,	and	grant	to	each	to
leave	to	his	children	150	his	property	in	his	house	and	the	rights	the	people
have	given	him.
But	for	me,	urge	that	conveyance	be	given	quickly
to	my	country,	since	long	now	far	from	my	people	I	suffer	hardships.’
So	he	spoke,	and	sat	down	beside	the	hearth	in	the	ashes
next	the	fire,	while	all	of	them	stayed	stricken	to	silence.
155	But	at	long	last	the	aged	hero	
Echeneos
	spoke	forth.
He	was	the	most	advanced	in	age	of	all	the	Phaiakians,
and	surpassed	all	in	words,	knowing	many	things	from	time	long	past.
He	in	kind	intention	now	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them:	‘Alkinoös,	this
is	not	the	better	way,	nor	is	it	fitting	160	that	the	stranger	should	sit	on	the
ground	beside	the	hearth,	in	the	ashes.
These	others	are	holding	back	because	they	await	your	order.
But	come,	raise	the	stranger	up	and	seat	him	on	a	silver-studded	chair,	and
tell	your	heralds	to	mix	in	more	wine	for	us,	so	we	can	pour	a	libation	to
Zeus	who	delights	in	the	thunder,	165	and	he	goes	together	with	suppliants,
whose	rights	are	sacred.
And	let	the	housekeeper	from	her	stores	give	the	stranger	a	supper.’
But	when	Alkinoös	of	the	hallowed	strength	had	heard	this,
he	took	by	the	hand	the	wise	and	much-devising	Odysseus,	and	raised	him
up	from	the	fireside,	and	set	him	in	a	shining	chair,	170	displacing	for	this
powerful	
Laodamas
,	his	son,	who	had	been	sitting	next	him	and	who	was
the	one	he	loved	most.
A	maidservant	brought	water	for	him	and	poured	it	from	a	splendid	and
golden	pitcher,	holding	it	above	a	silver	basin
for	him	to	wash,	and	she	pulled	a	polished	table	before	him.
175	A	grave	housekeeper	brought	in	the	bread	and	served	it	to	him,	adding
many	good	things	to	it,	generous	with	her	provisions.
Then	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	ate	and	drank.	After
this,	Alkinoös,	the	hallowed	prince,	spoke	to	his	herald:	‘Pontonoös,	now
mix	a	wine	bowl	and	serve	it	to	all	here
Odysseus	kindly	received
180	in	the	hall,	to	make	a	libation	to	Zeus	who	delights	in	the	thunder	and	who
goes	together	with	suppliants,	whose	rights	are	sacred.’
So	he	spoke,	and	
Pontonoös
	mixed	the	kindly	sweet	wine,	and	passed	a
portion	to	all,	offering	a	drink	in	the	goblets.
Then	when	they	had	made	libation	and	drunk	as	much	as	each	wanted,	185
Alkinoös	made	a	public	speech	for	them,	and	spoke	thus:	‘Hear	me,	leaders
of	the	Phaiakians	and	men	of	counsel,
while	I	speak	forth	what	the	heart	within	my	breast	urges.
Now,	having	feasted,	go	home	and	take	your	rest,	and	tomorrow	at	dawn
we	shall	call	the	elders	in,	in	greater	numbers,	190	and	entertain	the	guest
in	our	halls,	and	to	the	immortals	accomplish	fine	sacrifices,	and	after	that
we	shall	think	of	conveyance,	and	how	our	guest	without	annoyance	or
hardship	may	come	again,	convoyed	by	us,	to	his	own	country,
in	happiness	and	speed,	even	though	it	lies	very	far	off,	195	and	on	the	way
between	suffer	no	pain	nor	evil
until	he	sets	foot	on	his	own	country;	but	there	in	the	future	he	shall	endure
all	that	his	destiny	and	the	heavy	Spinners	spun	for	him	with	the	thread	at
his	birth,	when	his	mother	bore	him.
But	if	he	is	one	of	the	immortals	come	down	from	heaven,	200	then	this	is
a	new	kind	of	thing	the	gods	are	devising;	for	always	in	time	past	the	gods
have	shown	themselves	clearly	to	us,	when	we	render	them	glorious	grand
sacrifices,
and	they	sit	beside	us	and	feast	with	us	in	the	place	where	we	do,	or	if	one
comes	alone	and	encounters	us,	as	a	wayfarer,
205	then	they	make	no	concealment,	as	we	are	very	close	to	them,	as	are	the
Cyclopes	and	the	savage	tribes	of	the	Giants.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Alkinoös,	let	something	else	be	in	your	mind;	I	am	not
in	any	way	like	the	immortals	who	hold	wide	heaven,
210	neither	in	build	nor	stature,	but	only	to	men	who	are	mortal.
Whoever	it	is	of	people	you	know	who	wear	the	greatest
burden	of	misery,	such	are	the	ones	whom	I	would	equal
for	pain	endured,	and	I	could	tell	of	still	more	troubles	that	are	all	mine	and
by	the	will	of	the	gods	I	suffered.
215	But	leave	me	now	to	eat	my	dinner,	for	all	my	sorrow,
for	there	is	no	other	thing	so	shameless	as	to	be	set	over	the	belly,	but	she
rather	uses	constraint	and	makes	me	think	of	her,	even	when	sadly	worn,
when	in	my	heart	I	have	sorrow
tells	how	he	arrived
as	now	I	have	sorrow	in	my	heart,	yet	still	forever
220	she	tells	me	to	eat	and	drink	and	forces	me	to	forgetfulness	of	all	I	have
suffered,	and	still	she	is	urgent	that	I	must	fill	her.
But	you,	when	dawn	tomorrow	shows,	see	that	you	make	speed	to	set
unhappy	me	once	more	on	my	own	land,	even
when	I	have	much	suffered;	and	let	life	leave	me	when	I	have	once	more
225	seen	my	property,	my	serving	people,	and	my	great	high-roofed
house.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	all	approved	his	word	and	encouraged
convoy	for	the	stranger,	for	what	he	said	was	fair	and	orderly;	but	when
they	had	made	libation	and	drunk,	each	as	much	as	his	heart	desired,	they
went	away	each	to	his	house	to	rest,	and	now	230	he,	the	great	Odysseus,
remained	still	in	the	palace,
and	along	with	him	were	Arete	and	the	godlike	Alkinoös,
who	sat	by	him,	and	the	servants	cleared	away	the	dinner	things.
Now	it	was	white-armed	Arete	who	began	their	discourse,
for	she	recognized	the	mantle	and	tunic	when	she	saw	them,	splendid	235
clothes	which	she	herself	had	made,	with	her	serving	women.
Now	she	spoke	aloud	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:
‘Stranger	and	friend,	I	myself	first	have	a	question	to	ask	you.
What	man	are	you,	and	whence?	And	who	was	it	gave	you	this	clothing?
Did	you	not	say	that	you	came	here	ranging	over	the	water?’
240	Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:	‘It	is	a	hard
thing,	O	queen,	to	tell	you	without	intermission,	all	my	troubles,	since	the
gods	of	the	sky	have	given	me	many.
But	this	now	I	will	tell	you	in	answer	to	the	question	you	asked	me.
There	is	an	island,	Ogygia.	It	lies	in	the	water
245	far	off.	There	the	daughter	of	Atlas,	subtle	Kalypso,
lives,	with	ordered	hair,	a	dread	goddess,	and	there	is	no	one,	neither	a	god
nor	mortal	person,	who	keeps	her	company.
It	was	unhappy	I	alone	whom	my	destiny	brought	there
to	her	hearth,	when	Zeus	with	a	gathered	cast	of	the	shining	lightning	250
shattered	my	fast	ship	midway	on	the	wine-blue	water.
There	all	the	rest	of	my	excellent	companions	perished,
but	I,	catching	in	my	arms	the	keel	of	the	oarswept	vessel,	was	carried	for
nine	days,	and	on	the	tenth	in	the	black	night	the	gods	brought	me	to	the
island	Ogygia,	where	Kalypso
255	lives,	with	ordered	hair,	a	dread	goddess,	and	she	received	me	and	loved
me	excessively	and	cared	for	me,	and	she	promised	to	make	me	an
immortal	and	all	my	days	to	be	ageless,
Alkinoös	offers	to	send	Odysseus	on	his	way
but	never	so	could	she	win	over	the	heart	within	me.
There	seven	years	I	remained	fast,	but	forever	was	drenching	260	with
tears	that	clothing,	immortal	stuff,	Kalypso	had	given.
But	when	in	the	turning	of	time	the	eighth	year	had	befallen	me,	she
herself	told	me	to	go	and	urged	me	to	do	it,	whether	by	a	message	from
Zeus	or	whether	her	own	mind	turned	within	her,	and	she	sent	me	on	my
way	on	a	jointed	raft,	and	gave	me	265	much,	bread	and	sweet	wine,	and
put	immortal	clothing	upon	me,	and	sent	a	following	wind	to	carry	me,
warm	and	easy.
Seventeen	days	I	sailed,	making	my	way	over	the	water,
and	on	the	eighteenth	day	there	showed	the	shadowy	mountains	of	your
own	country,	and	the	dear	heart	was	happy	within	me;	270	but	I	was
unlucky,	and	had	much	misery	left	to	live	with	still,	what	was	driven	upon
me	by	the	Earthshaker,	Poseidon,	who	hampered	me	from	my	way,	letting
loose	the	winds	upon	me,	and	stirred	up	an	unspeakable	sea,	nor	did	the
surf	swell	let	me	sail	along	on	my	raft,	though	groaning	constantly.
275	For	now	the	stormwind	scattered	it	far	and	wide,	and	I	now	made	my	way
across	the	great	gulf	by	swimming,	until
the	wind	and	the	water	carried	me	and	drove	me	to	your	shore;	but	there,
had	I	tried	to	set	foot	on	the	land,	the	rough	wave	would	have	dashed	me
against	tall	rocks	in	a	place	that	was	cheerless,	280	so	I	backed	away	and
swam	again,	until	I	came	to
a	river,	and	this	at	last	seemed	to	me	to	be	the	best	place,	being	bare	of
rocks,	and	there	was	even	shelter	from	the	wind	there.
I	came	out	and	dropped,	nursing	a	hold	on	life,	and	immortal	night	came
on.	I	went	out	and	away	from	the	sky-fallen	river,	285	and	went	to	sleep
there	among	the	bushes,	piled	in	a	covering	of	leaves,	and	the	god	drifted
an	infinite	sleep	about	me.
And	there	among	the	leaves,	my	heart	exhausted	with	sorrow,	I	slept
nightlong,	and	into	the	dawn,	and	on	to	the	noonday,	and	the	sun	was
losing	its	light,	and	then	the	sweet	sleep	released	me.
290	Then	I	was	aware	of	your	daughter's	attendant	women	playing	on	the
beach,	and	she,	looking	like	the	goddesses,	went	there	among	them.
I	supplicated	her,	nor	did	she	fail	of	the	right	decision;	it	was	as	you	could
never	have	hoped	for	a	young	person,	so	confronted,	to	act,	for	always	the
younger	people	are	careless.	Also	295	she	gave	me	food	in	plenty	to	eat,
she	gave	me	gleaming	wine,	and	a	bath	in	the	river.	She	also	gave	me	this
clothing.
after	suggesting	a	marriage	with	Nausikaa
Sorrowful	as	I	am,	all	this	is	true	I	have	told	you.’
Then	in	turn	Alkinoös	spoke	to	him	and	answered:
‘My	friend,	here	is	one	proper	thought	that	my	daughter	was	not	300	aware
of,	when	she	failed	to	bring	you,	with	her	attendants,	here	to	our	house.	It
was	she	to	whom	you	first	came	as	a	suppliant.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Hero,	do	not	for	my	sake	find	fault	with	your	blameless	daughter.
She	did	urge	me	to	follow	along	with	her	serving	maidens,	305	but	I	for
embarrassment	and	dread	was	not	willing,	for	fear	that	something	in	this
might	stir	your	spirit	to	anger	seeing	us.
For	we	who	are	people	upon	this	earth	are	jealous	in	judgment.’
Then	in	turn	Alkinoös	spoke	to	him	and	answered:
‘Stranger,	the	inward	heart	in	my	breast	is	not	of	such	a	kind	310	as	to	be
recklessly	angry.	Always	moderation	is	better.
O	father	Zeus,	Athene	and	Apollo,	how	I	wish
that,	being	the	man	you	are	and	thinking	the	way	that	I	do,	you	could	have
my	daughter	and	be	called	my	son-in-law,	staying	here	with	me.	I	would
dower	you	with	a	house	and	properties,	315	if	you	stayed	by	your	own
good	will.	Against	that,	no	Phaiakian	shall	detain	you.	Never	may	such	be
to	Zeus	father's	liking.
As	for	conveyance,	so	that	you	may	be	sure,	I	appoint	it	for	tomorrow,	until
which	time	giving	way	to	slumber
you	may	rest,	and	they	will	sail	in	the	calm,	to	bring	you	320	back	to	your
country	and	house	and	whatever	else	is	dear	to	you,	even	if	this	may	be
much	further	away	than	Euboia,
which	those	of	our	people	who	have	seen	it	say	is	the	farthest	away	of	all,
at	that	time	they	carried	fair-haired	Rhadamanthys	on	his	way	to	visit
Tityos	the	son	of	
Gaia
.
325	They	went	there,	and	without	any	strain	they	accomplished	the	journey,
and	on	the	very	same	day	they	were	back	home	with	us.
You	yourself	will	see	and	know	in	your	mind	how	my	ships	are	best,	and
my	young	men	for	tossing	up	sea	with	the	oarblade.’
So	he	spoke,	and	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	was	happy.
330	He	spoke	a	word	then	in	prayer	and	named	him	by	name,	saying:	‘Father
Zeus,	may	Alkinoös	accomplish	everything
of	which	he	spoke,	and	so	may	he	have	imperishable	glory	upon	the	grain-
giving	earth;	and	I	come	home	to	my	country.’
So	now	these	two	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,
335	but	Arete	of	the	white	arms	told	her	attendant	women
Odysseus	rests
to	make	up	a	bed	in	the	porch's	shelter	and	to	lay	upon	it	fine	underbedding
of	purple	and	spread	blankets	above	it,	and	fleecy	robes	to	be	an	over-all
covering.	The	maidservants	went	forth	from	the	main	house,	and	in	their
hands	held	torches.
340	When	they	had	set	to	work	and	presently	had	a	firm	bed	made,	they	came
and	stood	beside	Odysseus,	and	with	words	roused	him:	‘Up,	stranger,	so
you	can	go	to	rest.	Your	bed	is	made	for	you.’
So	they	spoke,	and	the	thought	of	sleeping	was	welcome	to	him.
Then	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	lay	down	and	slept	there	345	upon	a
corded	bedstead	in	the	echoing	portico,
but	Alkinoös	went	to	bed	in	the	inner	room	of	the	high	house,	and	at	his
side	the	lady	his	wife	served	as	bedfellow.
BOOK	VIII
Then	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
Alkinoös,	the	hallowed	prince,	rose	up	from	his	sleeping,
and	the	descendant	of	Zeus,	Odysseus	sacker	of	cities,
rose	up,	and	Alkinoös,	the	hallowed	prince,	guided	them
5	to	the	Phaiakians'	place	of	assembly,	which	was	built	for	them	by	the	ships.
They	went	and	took	their	seats	on	the	polished	stones	together,	but	Pallas
Athene	went	through	the	city,
likening	herself	to	the	herald	of	wise	Alkinoös,
as	she	was	devising	the	return	of	great-hearted	Odysseus.
10	She	would	go	and	stand	beside	each	man	and	speak	a	word	to	him:	‘Come
with	me,	leaders	of	the	Phaiakians	and	men	of	counsel,	to	the	place	of
assembly,	there	to	find	out	about	the	stranger
who	is	new-come	to	the	house	of	wise	Alkinoös,	after
wandering	on	the	great	sea,	and	in	shape	he	is	like	the	immortals.’
15	So	she	spoke,	and	stirred	the	spirit	and	strength	in	each	man,	and	quickly
the	place	of	assembly	and	seats	were	filled	with	people	who	gathered
there,	and	many	wondered	much	as	they	looked	on	the	wise	son	of
Laertes,	and	upon	him	Athene
drifted	a	magical	grace	about	his	head	and	his	shoulders,
20	and	made	him	taller	for	the	eye	to	behold,	and	thicker,	so	that	he	might	be
loved	by	all	the	Phaiakians,	and	to	them	might	be	wonderful	and
respected,	and	might	accomplish	many
trials	of	strength	by	which	the	Phaiakians	tested	Odysseus.
But	when	they	were	assembled	and	all	in	one	place	together,
Feast	in	the	palace
25	to	them	now	Alkinoös	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them:	‘Hear	me,	you
leaders	of	the	Phaiakians	and	men	of	counsel,	while	I	speak	forth	what	the
heart	within	my	breast	urges.
Here	is	this	stranger,	I	do	not	know	who	he	is,	come	wandering
suppliant	here	to	my	house	from	the	eastern	or	western	people.
30	He	urges	conveyance,	and	entreats	us	for	its	assurance.	So	let	us,	as	we
have	done	before,	hasten	to	convey	him,	for	neither	has	any	other	man
who	has	come	to	my	house
stayed	here	grieving	a	long	time	for	the	matter	of	convoy.
Come	then,	let	us	drag	a	black	ship	down	to	the	bright	sea,
35	one	sailing	now	for	the	first	time,	and	have	for	it	a	selection	from	the
district,	fifty-two	young	men,	who	have	been	the	finest	before.	Then,	each
man	fastening	his	oar	to	the	oarlock,
disembark,	then	come	to	my	house	and	make	yourselves	busy
for	a	present	feast,	and	I	will	make	generous	provision
40	for	all.	I	say	this	to	the	young	men,	but	also,	you	other	sceptered	kings,
come	to	me	in	my	splendid	dwelling,	so	we	can	entertain	the	stranger
guest	in	our	palace.
Let	none	refuse;	and	summon	also	the	inspired	singer
Demodokos
,	for	to	him	the	god	gave	song	surpassing	45	in	power	to
please,	whenever	the	spirit	moves	him	to	singing.’
So	he	spoke,	and	led	the	way,	and	the	others	followed,	as	sceptered
kings,	but	a	herald	went	seeking	the	inspired	singer,	and	also	the	fifty-two
young	men	who	had	been	selected
went,	as	he	told	them,	along	the	beach	of	the	barren	salt	sea.
50	But	when	they	had	come	down	to	the	sea,	and	where	the	ship	was,	they
dragged	the	black	ship	down	to	the	deeper	part	of	the	water,	and	in	the
black	hull	set	the	mast	in	place,	and	set	sails,
and	made	the	oars	fast	in	the	leather	slings	of	the	oarlocks
all	in	good	order,	and	hoisted	the	white	sails	and	set	them.
55	They	anchored	her	deep	enough	in	the	channel,	and	then	themselves	made
their	way	to	the	great	house	of	wise	Alkinoös,	and	the	porticoes	and
enclosures	and	rooms	were	filled	with	people
assembling,	there	were	many	men	there,	both	old	and	young	ones,
and	for	them	Alkinoös	made	a	sacrifice,	twelve	sheep,	eight
60	pigs	with	shining	tusks,	and	two	drag-footed	oxen.	These	they	skinned	and
prepared	and	made	the	lovely	feast	ready.
The	herald	came	near,	bringing	with	him	the	excellent	singer
whom	the	Muse	had	loved	greatly,	and	gave	him	both	good	and	evil.
Demodokos	sings	about	Odysseus	at	Troy
She	reft	him	of	his	eyes,	but	she	gave	him	the	sweet	singing
65	art.	Pontonoös	set	a	silver-studded	chair	out	for	him	in	the	middle	of	the
feasters,	propping	it	against	a	tall	column,	and	the	herald	hung	the	clear
lyre	on	a	peg	placed	over
his	head,	and	showed	him	how	to	reach	up	with	his	hands	and	take	it
down,	and	set	beside	him	a	table	and	a	fine	basket,
70	and	beside	him	a	cup	to	drink	whenever	his	spirit	desired	it.	They	put	forth
their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,
the	Muse	stirred	the	singer	to	sing	the	famous	actions
of	men	on	that	venture,	whose	fame	goes	up	into	the	wide	heaven,
75	the	quarrel	between	Odysseus	and	Peleus'	son,	Achilleus,	how	these	once
contended,	at	the	god's	generous	festival,	with	words	of	violence,	so	that
the	lord	of	men,	Agamemnon,
was	happy	in	his	heart	that	the	best	of	the	Achaians	were	quarreling;
for	so	in	prophecy	Phoibos	Apollo	had	spoken	to	him
80	in	sacred	
Pytho
,	when	he	had	stepped	across	the	stone	doorstep	to	consult;
for	now	the	beginning	of	evil	rolled	on,	descending	on	Trojans,	and	on
Danaans,	through	the	designs	of	great	Zeus.
These	things	the	famous	singer	sang	for	them,	but	Odysseus,
taking	in	his	ponderous	hands	the	great	mantle	dyed	in
85	sea-purple,	drew	it	over	his	head	and	veiled	his	fine	features,	shamed	for
tears	running	down	his	face	before	the	Phaiakians;	and	every	time	the
divine	singer	would	pause	in	his	singing,
he	would	take	the	mantle	away	from	his	head,	and	wipe	the	tears	off,
and	taking	up	a	two-handled	goblet	would	pour	a	libation
90	to	the	gods,	but	every	time	he	began	again,	and	the	greatest	of	the
Phaiakians	would	urge	him	to	sing,	since	they	joyed	in	his	stories,
Odysseus	would	cover	his	head	again,	and	make	lamentation.
There,	shedding	tears,	he	went	unnoticed	by	all	the	others,
but	Alkinoös	alone	understood	what	he	did	and	noticed,
95	since	he	was	sitting	next	him	and	heard	him	groaning	heavily.	At	once	he
spoke	aloud	to	the	oar-loving	Phaiakians:	‘Hear	me,	you	leaders	of	the
Phaiakians	and	men	of	counsel.
By	this	time	we	have	filled	our	desire	for	the	equal	feasting
and	for	the	lyre,	which	is	the	companion	to	the	generous
100	feast.	Now	let	us	go	outside	and	make	our	endeavor	in	all	contests,	so	that
our	stranger	can	tell	his	friends,	after	he	reaches	his	home,	by	how	much
we	surpass	all	others
Games	to	console	Odysseus
in	boxing,	wrestling,	leaping	and	speed	of	our	feet	for	running.’
So	he	spoke,	and	led	the	way,	and	the	rest	went	with	him,
105	and	the	herald	hung	up	the	clear	lyre	on	its	peg,	and	taking	Demodokos
by	the	hand	he	led	him	out	of	the	palace	and	set	him	on	the	start	of	the
way,	where	all	the	other
best	men	of	the	Phaiakians	went,	to	gaze	at	the	contests.
They	went	to	the	place	of	assembly,	with	an	endless	multitude
110	following,	and	many	and	excellent	young	men	stood	forth.	
Akroneos
stood	up,	and	
Okyalos
	and	
Elatreus
,	
Nauteus
	and	Prymneus,	Anchialos
and	
Eretmeus
,	
Ponteus
	and	
Proreus
,	
Thoön
	and	
Anabesineos
,	
Amphialos
,
son	of	
Polyneos
,	the	son	of	
Tekton
,	115	and	Euryalos	stood	up,	
Naubolos'
son,	a	man	like	murderous	Ares	himself,	and	he	was	best	of	all	the
Phaiakians	in	build	and	beauty,	only	except	for	stately	Laodamas.
Also	there	stood	forth	three	sons	of	stately	Alkinoös,
Laodamas	and	
Halios
	and	godlike	
Klytoneos
.
120	First	of	all	they	held	a	contest	for	speed	in	running.	The	field	strung	out
from	the	starting	scratch,	yet	all	at	the	same	time	flew	on	together,	turning
up	the	dust	of	the	plain.	Of	these
stately	Klytoneos	was	far	the	best	in	the	running,
and	was	out	in	front	by	the	length	of	a	furrow	for	mules	plowing
125	a	field,	and	came	back	first	to	the	crowd,	with	the	rest	behind	him.	Next
these	tried	each	other	out	in	the	painful	wrestling,	and	in	this	Euryalos
surpassed	all	the	best	among	them.
In	the	jump	it	was	Amphialos	who	outdid	all	others,
while	with	the	discus	far	the	best	of	them	was	Elatreus,
130	and	in	boxing	it	was	Alkinoös	fine	son,	Loadamas.	But	after	all	had
enjoyed	their	hearts	with	athletic	contests,	Loadamas	the	son	of	Alkinoös
spoke	forth	among	them:
‘Come,	friends,	let	us	ask	the	stranger	if	he	has	skill	and	knowledge
for	any	kind	of	contest.	In	his	build	he	is	no	mean	man,
135	for	the	lower	legs	and	thighs	he	has,	and	both	arms	above	them,	for	the
massive	neck	and	the	great	strength,	nor	is	it	that	he	lacks	youth,	but	the
crush	of	many	misfortunes	has	used	him	hardly.
For	I	say	there	is	no	other	thing	that	is	worse	than	the	sea	is
for	breaking	a	man,	even	though	he	may	be	a	very	strong	one.’
140	Then	in	turn	Euryalos	spoke	forth	and	answered:	‘Loadamas,	this	word
you	spoke	was	fair	and	orderly.
He	declines	to	compete
Go	yourself	then,	and	say	it	to	him,	and	invite	him	to	try	it.’
Then	when	the	excellent	son	of	Alkinoös	heard	this	answer,	he	went
and	stood	in	the	midst	of	them	and	spoke	to	Odysseus:	145	‘Come	you	also
now,	father	stranger,	and	try	these	contests,	if	you	have	skill	in	any.	It
beseems	you	to	know	athletics,	for	there	is	no	greater	glory	that	can	befall
a	man	living
than	what	he	achieves	by	speed	of	his	feet	or	strength	of	his	hands.	So
come	then	and	try	it,	and	scatter	those	cares	that	are	on	your	spirit.
150	Your	voyage	will	not	be	put	off	for	long,	but	now	already	your	ship	is
hauled	down	to	the	sea,	and	your	companions	are	ready.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Laodamas,	why	do	you	all	urge	me	on	in	mockery
to	do	these	things?	Cares	are	more	in	my	mind	than	games	are,
155	who	before	this	have	suffered	much	and	had	many	hardships,	and	sit	here
now	in	the	middle	of	your	assembly,	longing	to	go	home,	entreating	your
king	for	this,	and	all	of	his	people.’
Euryalos
	answered	him	to	his	face	and	spoke	to	him	roughly:	‘No,
stranger,	for	I	do	not	see	that	you	are	like	one	versed
160	in	contests,	such	as	now	are	practiced	much	among	people,	but	rather	to
one	who	plies	his	ways	in	his	many-locked	vessel,	master	over	mariners
who	also	are	men	of	business,
a	man	who,	careful	of	his	cargo	and	grasping	for	profits,
goes	carefully	on	his	way.	You	do	not	resemble	an	athlete.’
165	Then	looking	at	him	darkly	resourceful	Odysseus	answered:	‘Friend,	that
was	not	well	spoken;	you	seem	like	one	who	is	reckless.	So	it	is	that	the
gods	do	not	bestow	graces	in	all	ways	on	men,	neither	in	stature	nor	yet	in
brains	or	eloquence;
for	there	is	a	certain	kind	of	man,	less	noted	for	beauty,
170	but	the	god	puts	comeliness	on	his	words,	and	they	who	look	toward	him
are	filled	with	joy	at	the	sight,	and	he	speaks	to	them	without	faltering	in
winning	modesty,	and	shines	among	those	who	are	gathered,
and	people	look	on	him	as	on	a	god	when	he	walks	in	the	city.
Another	again	in	his	appearance	is	like	the	immortals,
175	but	upon	his	words	there	is	no	grace	distilled,	as	in	your	case	the
appearance	is	conspicuous,	and	not	a	god	even	would	make	it	otherwise,
and	yet	the	mind	there	is	worthless.
Now	you	have	stirred	up	anger	deep	in	the	breast	within	me
by	this	disorderly	speaking,	and	I	am	not	such	a	new	hand
180	at	games	as	you	say,	but	always,	as	I	think,	I	have	been
But	angered	by	the	rude	Euryalos
among	the	best	when	I	still	had	trust	in	youth	and	hands’	strength.	Now	I
am	held	in	evil	condition	and	pain;	for	I	had	much	to	suffer:	the	wars	of
men;	hard	crossing	of	the	big	waters.
But	even	so	for	all	my	troubles	I	will	try	your	contests,
185	for	your	word	bit	in	the	heart,	and	you	have	stirred	me	by	speaking.’
He	spoke,	and	with	mantle	still	on	sprang	up	and	laid	hold	of	a	discus
that	was	a	bigger	and	thicker	one,	heavier	not	by	a	little	than	the	one	the
Phaiakians	had	used	for	their	sport	in	throwing.
He	spun,	and	let	this	fly	from	his	ponderous	hand.	The	stone
190	hummed	in	the	air,	and	the	Phaiakians,	men	of	long	oars	and	famed	for
seafaring,	shrank	down	against	the	ground,	ducking	under	the	flight	of	the
stone	which,	speeding	from	his	hand	lightly,
overflew	the	marks	of	all	others,	and	Athene,	likening
herself	to	a	man,	marked	down	the	cast	and	spoke	and	addressed	him:
195	‘Even	a	blind	man,	friend,	would	be	able	to	distinguish	your	mark	by
feeling	for	it,	since	it	is	not	mingled	with	the	common	lot,	but	far	before.
Have	no	fear	over	this	contest.
No	one	of	the	Phaiakians	will	come	up	to	this	mark	or	pass	it.’
She	spoke,	and	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	rejoiced,	happy
200	to	find	one	friendly	companion	in	the	assembled	company.	Again	he
spoke	to	the	Phaiakians,	in	language	more	blithe:	‘Now	reach	me	that
mark,	young	men,	and	then	I	will	make	another
throw,	as	great	as	this,	I	think,	or	one	even	better.
Let	any	of	the	rest,	whose	heart	and	spirit	are	urgent	for	it,
205	come	up	and	try	me,	since	you	have	irritated	me	so,	either	at	boxing	or
wrestling	or	in	a	foot	race,	I	begrudge	nothing;	any	of	the	Phaiakians,	that
is,	except	Laodamas
himself,	for	he	is	my	host;	who	would	fight	with	his	friend?	Surely
any	man	can	be	called	insensate	and	good	for	nothing
210	who	in	an	alien	community	offers	to	challenge	his	friend	and	host	in	the
games.	He	damages	what	is	his.	No,	but	I	refuse	not	one	of	the	rest,	nor	do
I	scorn	him,
but	I	am	willing	to	look	in	his	eyes	and	be	tested	against	him.
I	am	not	bad	in	any	of	the	contests	where	men	strive.
215	I	know	well	how	to	handle	the	polished	bow,	and	would	be	first	to	strike
my	man	with	an	arrow	aimed	at	a	company	of	hostile	men,	even	though
many	companions	were	standing
close	beside	me,	and	all	shooting	with	bows	at	the	enemies.
There	was	Philoktetes	alone	who	surpassed	me	in	archery
Odysseus	excels	in	throwing	the	discus
220	when	we	Achaians	shot	with	bows	in	the	Trojan	country.	But	I	will	say
that	I	stand	far	out	ahead	of	all	others	such	as	are	living	mortals	now	and
feed	on	the	earth.	Only
I	will	not	set	myself	against	men	of	the	generations
before,	not	with	Herakles	nor	
Eurytos
	of	Oichalia,	225	who	set	themselves
against	the	immortals	with	the	bow,	and	therefore	great	Eurytos	died
suddenly	nor	came	to	an	old	age	in	his	own	mansions,	since	Apollo	in
anger	against	him
killed	him,	because	he	had	challenged	Apollo	in	archery.	I	can
throw	with	the	spear	as	far	as	another	casts	with	an	arrow.
230	Only	in	a	foot	race	I	fear	one	of	the	Phaiakians	might	outpass	me;	I	have
been	through	too	much	and	shamefully	battered	on	many	rough	seas,	since
there	could	be	no	orderly	training
on	shipboard;	because	of	this	my	legs	have	lost	their	condition.’
So	he	spoke,	and	all	of	them	stayed	stricken	to	silence.
235	Only	Alkinoös	spoke	up	and	gave	him	an	answer:	‘My	friend,	since	it	is
not	graceless	for	you	to	speak	thus	among	us,	but	you	are	willing	to	show
that	excellence	you	are	endowed	with,
angered	because	this	man	came	up	to	you	in	our	assembly
and	belittled	you,	in	a	way	no	man	would	properly	find	fault
240	with	your	excellence,	if	he	knew	in	his	heart	how	to	speak	sensibly:	come
then,	attend	to	what	I	say,	so	that	you	can	tell	it	even	to	some	other	hero
after	this,	when	in	your	palace
you	sit	at	the	feasting	with	your	own	wife	and	children	beside	you,
remembering	our	excellence	and	what	Zeus	has	established
245	as	our	activities,	through	time,	from	the	days	of	our	fathers.	For	we	are
not	perfect	in	our	boxing,	nor	yet	as	wrestlers,	but	we	do	run	lightly	on
our	feet,	and	are	excellent	seamen,
and	always	the	feast	is	dear	to	us,	and	the	lyre	and	dances
and	changes	of	clothing	and	our	hot	baths	and	beds.	Come	then,
250	you	who	among	all	the	Phaiakians	are	the	best	dancers,	do	your	dance,	so
that	our	guest,	after	he	comes	home	to	his	own	people,	can	tell	them	how
far	we	surpass	all	others
in	our	seamanship	and	the	speed	of	our	feet	and	dancing	and	singing.
Let	someone	go	quickly	and	bring	Demodokos	his	clear-voiced
255	lyre,	which	must	have	been	set	down	somewhere	in	our	palace.’
So	godlike	Alkinoös	spoke,	and	the	herald	rose	up	to	bring	the
hollowed	lyre	out	of	the	king's	house,	and	now	stewards	of	the	course
stood	up,	nine	in	all	of	them,	chosen
Demodokos	sings
out	of	the	people,	who	on	every	occasion	set	in	good	order
260	the	grounds	for	games,	and	they	smoothed	the	dancing	floor	and	set	right
all	the	ground,	and	the	herald	came	bringing	with	him	the	clear	lyre	for
Demodokos,	who	moved	into	the	middle,	and	about	him	stood	forth
young	men	in	the	first	of	their	youth,	well	trained	in	dancing,
and	beat	the	wonderful	dancing	floor	with	their	feet.	Odysseus
265	gazed	on	the	twinkling	of	their	feet,	his	heart	full	of	wonder.
Demodokos	struck	the	lyre	and	began	singing	well	the	story	about	the
love	of	
Ares
	and	sweet-garlanded	Aphrodite,	how	they	first	lay	together	in
the	house	of	Hephaistos
secretly;	he	gave	her	much	and	fouled	the	marriage
270	and	bed	of	the	lord	Hephaistos;	to	him	there	came	as	messenger	Helios,
the	sun,	who	had	seen	them	lying	in	love	together.
Hephaistos,	when	he	had	heard	the	heartsore	story	of	it,
went	on	his	way	to	his	smithy,	heart	turbulent	with	hard	sorrows,
and	set	the	great	anvil	upon	its	stand,	and	hammered	out	fastenings
275	that	could	not	be	slipped	or	broken,	to	hold	them	fixed	in	position.	Now
when,	in	his	anger	against	Ares,	he	had	made	this	treacherous	snare,	he
went	to	his	chamber	where	his	own	dear	bed	lay,
and	spun	his	fastenings	around	the	posts	from	every	direction,
while	many	more	were	suspended	overhead,	from	the	roof	beams,
280	thin,	like	spider	webs,	which	not	even	one	of	the	blessed	gods	could	see.
He	had	fashioned	it	to	be	very	deceptive.
But	when	he	had	spun	about	the	bedstead	all	of	his	treacherous
device,	he	started	for	
Lemnos
,	the	strong-founded	citadel,	which,	of	all
territories	on	earth,	was	far	dearest	to	him.
285	Nor	did	Ares	of	the	golden	reins	keep	a	blind	watch	on	him,	as	he	saw
Hephaistos	the	glorious	smith	go	away,	but	he	then	took	his	course	so	he
entered	the	house	of	glorious	Hephaistos
lusting	after	the	love	of	sweet-garlanded	
Kythereia
.
She	had	lately	come	in	from	the	house	of	her	father,	the	powerful
290	son	of	Kronos,	and	sat	there	when	Ares	entered	the	house.	Then	he	took
her	by	the	hand	and	spoke	to	her	and	named	her,	saying:	‘Come,	my	dear,
let	us	take	our	way	to	the	bed,	and	lie	there,
for	Hephaistos	is	no	longer	hereabouts,	but	by	this	time
he	must	have	come	to	Lemnos	and	the	wild-spoken	
Sintians
.’
295	So	he	spoke,	and	she	was	well	pleased	to	sleep	with	him.	These	two	went
to	bed,	and	slept	there,	and	all	about	them	were	bending	the	artful	bonds
that	had	been	forged	by	subtle	Hephaistos,
about	the	love	of	Ares	and	Aphrodite
so	neither	of	them	could	stir	a	limb	or	get	up,	and	now
they	saw	the	truth,	and	there	was	no	longer	a	way	out	for	them.
300	The	glorious	smith	of	the	strong	arms	came	and	stood	near.	He	had	turned
back	on	his	way,	before	ever	reaching	the	Lemnian	country,	for	Helios	had
kept	watch	for	him,	and	told	him	the	story.
He	took	his	way	back	to	his	own	house,	heart	grieved	within	him,
and	stood	there	in	the	forecourt,	with	the	savage	anger	upon	him,
305	and	gave	out	a	terrible	cry	and	called	to	all	the	immortals:	‘Father	Zeus
and	all	you	other	blessed	immortal	gods,	come	here,	to	see	a	ridiculous
sight,	no	seemly
matter,	how	Aphrodite	daughter	of	Zeus	forever
holds	me	in	little	favor,	but	she	loves	ruinous	Ares
310	because	he	is	handsome,	and	goes	sound	on	his	feet,	while	I	am
misshapen	from	birth,	and	for	this	I	hold	no	other	responsible	but	my	own
father	and	mother,	and	I	wish	they	never	had	got	me.
Now	look	and	see,	where	these	two	have	gone	to	bed	and	lie	there
in	love	together.	I	am	sickened	when	I	look	at	them,	and	yet
315	I	think	they	will	not	go	on	lying	thus	even	for	a	little,	much	though	they
are	in	love,	I	think	they	will	have	no	wish	for	sleeping,	but	then	my
fastenings	and	my	snare	will	contain	them
until	her	father	pays	back	in	full	all	my	gifts	of	courtship
I	paid	out	into	his	hand	for	the	sake	of	his	bitch-eyed	daughter.
320	The	girl	is	beautiful	indeed,	but	she	is	intemperate.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	gods	gathered	to	the	house	with	the	brazen	floor.
Poseidon	came,	the	shaker	of	the	earth,	and	the	kindly	Hermes	came,	and
the	lord	who	works	from	afar,	Apollo,
but	the	female	gods	remained	each	at	her	home,	for	modesty.
325	The	gods,	the	givers	of	good	things,	stood	there	in	the	forecourt,	and
among	the	blessed	immortals	uncontrollable	laughter	went	up	as	they	saw
the	handiwork	of	subtle	Hephaistos.
And	thus	they	would	speak	to	each	other,	each	looking	at	the	god	next	him:
‘No	virtue	in	bad	dealings.	See,	the	slow	one	has	overtaken
330	the	swift,	as	now	slow	Hephaistos	has	overtaken	Ares,	swiftest	of	all	the
gods	on	Olympos,	by	artifice,	though	he	was	lame,	and	Ares	must	pay	the
adulterer's	damage.’
This	was	the	way	of	the	gods	as	they	conversed	with	each	other,
but	the	lord	Apollo	son	of	Zeus	said	a	word	to	Hermes:
335	‘Hermes,	son	of	Zeus,	guide	and	giver	of	good	things,	tell	me,
Ares	and	Aphrodite	concluded
would	you,	caught	tight	in	these	strong	fastenings,	be	willing	to	sleep	in
bed	by	the	side	of	Aphrodite	the	golden?’
Then	in	turn	the	courier	Argeïphontes	answered:
‘Lord	who	strike	from	afar,	Apollo,	I	wish	it	could	only
340	be,	and	there	could	be	thrice	this	number	of	endless	fastenings,	and	all
you	gods	could	be	looking	on	and	all	the	goddesses,	and	still	I	would
sleep	by	the	side	of	Aphrodite	the	golden.’
He	spoke,	and	there	was	laughter	among	the	immortals,	only
there	was	no	laughter	for	Poseidon,	but	he	kept	entreating
345	Hephaistos,	the	famous	craftsman,	asking	him	to	set	Ares	free,	and	spoke
aloud	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	‘Let	him	go,	and	I
guarantee	he	will	pay	whatever
you	ask,	all	that	is	approved	among	the	immortal	deities.’
Then	in	turn	the	renowned	smith	of	the	strong	arms	answered:
350	‘Shaker	of	the	earth,	Poseidon,	do	not	urge	this	on	me.	The	business	of
wretches	is	wretched	even	in	guarantee	giving.
To	what	could	I	hold	you	among	the	immortal	gods,	if	Ares
were	to	go	off,	avoiding	both	his	debt	and	his	bondage?’
Then	in	turn	Poseidon,	shaker	of	the	earth,	answered:
355	‘Hephaistos,	if	Ares	goes	off	and	escapes,	not	paying	anything	he	may
owe	you,	then	I	myself	will	pay	it.’
Then	in	turn	the	renowned	smith	of	the	strong	arms	answered:
‘It	cannot	be,	and	it	is	not	right,	that	I	should	deny	you.’
So	mighty	Hephaistos	spoke	and	undid	the	fastenings.	Straightway
360	the	two	of	them,	when	they	were	set	free	of	the	fastening,	though	it	was
so	strong,	sprang	up,	and	Ares	took	his	way	
Thraceward
,	while	she,
Aphrodite	lover	of	laughter,	went	back	to	
Paphos
on	Cyprus,	where	lies	her	sacred	precinct	and	her	smoky	altar,
and	there	the	Graces	bathed	her	and	anointed	her	with	ambrosial
365	oil,	such	as	abounds	for	the	gods	who	are	everlasting,	and	put	delightful
clothing	about	her,	a	wonder	to	look	on.
So	the	famous	singer	sang	his	song,	and	Odysseus
enjoyed	it	in	his	heart	as	he	listened,	as	did	the	others
there,	Phaiakians,	men	of	the	long	oar,	famed	for	seafaring.
370	Then	Alkinoös	asked	Halios	and	Laodamas	to	dance	all	by	themselves,
since	there	was	none	to	challenge	them.	These	two,	after	they	had	taken
up	in	their	hands	the	ball,	a	beautiful	thing,	red,	which	Polybos	the	skillful
craftsman	had	made	them,
one	of	them,	bending	far	back,	would	throw	it	up	to	the	shadowy
Dancing—apology	from	Euryalos
375	clouds,	and	the	other,	going	high	off	the	ground,	would	easily	catch	it
again,	before	his	feet	came	back	to	the	ground.	Then	after	they	had	played
their	game	with	the	ball	thrown	upward,
these	two	performed	a	dance	on	the	generous	earth,	with	rapid
interchange	of	position,	and	the	rest	of	the	young	men	standing
380	about	the	field	stamped	out	the	time,	and	a	great	sound	rose	up.	Then
great	Odysseus	spoke	a	word	to	Alkinoös,	saying:	‘O	great	Alkinoös,	pre-
eminent	among	all	people,
truly,	as	you	boasted	your	people	were	the	best	dancers,
so	it	is	done	before	me.	Wonder	takes	me	as	I	look	on	them.’
385	He	spoke,	and	Alkinoös	the	hallowed	king	was	pleased,	and	at	once	he
spoke	aloud	to	the	oar-loving	Phaiakians:	‘Hear	me,	leaders	of	the
Phaiakians	and	men	of	counsel.
I	think	this	stranger	is	a	man	of	discretion.	Therefore
come,	let	us	give	him	a	gift	of	friendship,	as	is	becoming.
390	For	here	are	twelve	who	are	marked	out	as	kings	in	our	country	with
power,	and	they	act	as	leaders,	and	I	myself	am	the	thirteenth.
Then	let	each	of	you	who	are	such	contribute	a	well-washed
robe,	and	a	tunic,	and	a	talent	of	precious	gold.	Then
we	shall	assemble	it	all	together,	so	that	our	stranger
395	may	have	it	in	his	hands	and	be	pleased	as	he	goes	in	to	supper.	But
Euryalos	shall	make	amends	to	him	with	a	spoken	word	and	a	gift,	for
having	spoken	out	of	due	measure.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	all	approved	what	he	said	and	urged	it,
and	each	one	sent	his	herald	away	to	bring	the	gifts	back.
400	Then	Euryalos	spoke	in	his	turn	and	answered	Alkinoös:	‘O	great
Alkinoös,	pre-eminent	among	all	people,	certainly	I	will	make	amends	to
our	guest,	as	you	urge	me.
I	will	give	him	this	sword,	which	is	all	bronze,	but	the	handle
on	it	is	silver,	and	there	is	a	scabbard	of	fresh-sawn	ivory
405	cut	in	rings	to	hold	it.	He	will	find	that	it	is	of	great	value.’
So	he	spoke,	and	put	the	sword	with	the	nails	of	silver	into	his	hands,
and	spoke	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	‘Farewell,	father
and	stranger,	and	if	any	word	was	let	slip
that	was	improper,	may	the	stormwinds	catch	it	away	and	carry	it
410	off,	and	the	gods	grant	you	safe	homecoming	to	your	own	country	and
wife;	since	here,	far	from	your	own	people,	you	must	be	suffering.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Farewell	also	to	you,	dear	friend,	and	may	the	gods	grant	you
Gifts	for	Odysseus
prosperity;	may	you	never	miss	this	sword	you	have	given
415	me	now,	as	a	gift,	and	made	amends	to	me	with	words	spoken.’
So	he	spoke,	and	slung	the	sword	with	the	nails	of	silver	over	his
shoulder.	The	sun	went	down,	and	the	glorious	presents	came	in,	carried	by
the	proud	heralds	of	Alkinoös,
and	these,	surpassingly	lovely	gifts,	the	sons	of	Alkinoös
420	took	over,	and	set	them	down	beside	their	respected	mother.	Now
Alkinoös	the	hallowed	king	was	their	leader,	and	all	of	them	went	into	the
house	and	sat	on	their	high	thrones.
Thereupon	the	king	Alkinoös	said	to	Arete:
‘Come,	wife,	bring	out	a	magnificent	coffer,	the	best	one	you	have,
425	and	in	it	yourself	lay	a	robe	that	is	newly	washed,	and	a	tunic.	Then	warm
a	brazen	caldron	over	the	fire,	and	heat	water	for	this	man,	so	he	may
bathe	and	then	see,	all	set	out	in	order,
the	presents	which	the	stately	Phaiakians	brought	here	to	give	him,
and	rejoice	in	the	feast	and	in	listening	to	the	song	of	the	singer.
430	I	myself	make	him	a	present	of	this	surpassingly	lovely	golden	cup,	so
that	all	his	days	he	may	remember	me	as	he	makes	libation	at	home	to
Zeus	and	the	other	immortals.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Arete	going	to	her	maidservants	told	them
to	set	the	great	caldron	over	the	fire,	as	quickly	as	might	be,
435	and	they	set	the	tripod	for	the	bathwater	over	the	blazing	fire,	and	poured
in	the	water	and	gathered	kindling	and	lit	it.
The	fire	worked	on	the	belly	of	the	caldron,	the	water	heated.
Meanwhile	Arete	brought	from	out	of	her	chamber	the	splendid
chest	for	the	stranger,	and	in	it	laid	the	beautiful	presents,
440	the	clothing	and	the	gold	which	the	Phaiakians	had	given,	and	she	herself
put	in	a	robe,	and	a	handsome	tunic,	and	spoke	to	the	stranger	and
addressed	him	in	winged	words,	saying:
‘You	yourself	must	see	to	the	cover	and	nimbly	fasten
a	knot,	so	none	may	break	in,	while	on	your	journey
445	you	rest	in	a	pleasant	sleep	as	you	go	your	ways	in	the	black	ship.’
When	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	had	heard	this,	straightway	he
made	the	covering	tight	upon	it	and	fastened	it	nimbly	with	an	intricate
knot,	whose	knowledge	the	lady	
Circe
	had	taught	him.
Then	the	housekeeper	told	him	without	delay	to	enter
450	the	tub	for	his	bath,	and	he	with	joy	in	his	heart	looked	on	the	hot	water,
for	he	had	not	been	used	to	be	so	looked	after	in	the	time	since	he	had	left
the	house	of	fair-haired	Kalypso,
Goodbye	Nausikaa
though	in	that	time	he	had	been	looked	after	as	if	he	were	truly
a	god.	When	the	maids	had	bathed	him	and	anointed	him	with	oil,
455	they	put	a	lovely	mantle	and	a	tunic	about	him,	and	he	stepped	from	the
bath	and	went	to	join	the	men	at	their	wine	drinking.	Then	Nausikaa,	with
the	gods'	loveliness	on	her,
stood	beside	the	pillar	that	supported	the	roof	with	its	joinery,
and	gazed	upon	Odysseus	with	all	her	eyes	and	admired	him,
460	and	spoke	to	him	aloud	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words,	saying:
‘Goodbye,	stranger,	and	think	of	me	sometimes	when	you	are	back	at
home,	how	I	was	the	first	you	owed	your	life	to.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
‘Nausikaa,	daughter	of	great-hearted	Alkinoös,
465	even	so	may	Zeus,	high-thundering	husband	of	Hera,	grant	me	to	reach
my	house	and	see	my	day	of	homecoming.
So	even	when	I	am	there	I	will	pray	to	you,	as	to	a	goddess,
all	the	days	of	my	life.	For,	maiden,	my	life	was	your	gift.’
He	spoke,	and	went	to	sit	on	a	chair	by	the	king	Alkinoös.
470	And	now	they	were	serving	out	the	portions	and	mixing	the	wine,	as	the
herald	came	near,	bringing	with	him	the	excellent	singer	Demodokos,
prized	among	the	people,	and	set	a	chair	for	him
in	the	middle	of	the	feasters,	propping	it	against	a	tall	column.
Resourceful	Odysseus	called	the	herald	over	and	spoke	to	him,
475	but	first	he	cut	a	piece	from	the	loin	of	the	pig	with	shining	teeth,	with
most	of	the	meat	left	on,	and	edged	with	rich	fat:	‘Here,	herald,	take	this
piece	of	meat	to	Demodokos	so	that
he	may	eat,	and	I,	though	a	sorry	man,	embrace	him.
For	with	all	peoples	upon	the	earth	singers	are	entitled
480	to	be	cherished	and	to	their	share	of	respect,	since	the	Muse	has	taught
them	her	own	way,	and	since	she	loves	all	the	company	of	singers.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	herald	took	the	portion	and	placed	it
in	the	hands	of	the	hero	Demodokos,	who	received	it	happily.
They	put	forth	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
485	But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,
Odysseus	the	resourceful	spoke	to	Demodokos,	saying:	‘Demodokos,
above	all	mortals	beside	I	prize	you.
Surely	the	Muse,	Zeus'	daughter	or	else	Apollo	has	taught	you,
for	all	too	right	following	the	tale	you	sing	the	Achaians’
490	venture,	all	they	did	and	had	done	to	them,	all	the	sufferings
Demodokos	sings	of	the	Trojan	Horse
of	these	Achaians,	as	if	you	had	been	there	yourself	or	heard	it	from	one
who	was.	Come	to	another	part	of	the	story,	sing	us	the	wooden	horse,
which	
Epeios
	made	with	Athene	helping,	the	stratagem	great	Odysseus
filled	once	with	men	and	brought	it
495	to	the	upper	city,	and	it	was	these	men	who	sacked	Ilion.	If	you	can	tell
me	the	course	of	all	these	things	as	they	happened,	I	will	speak	of	you
before	all	mankind,	and	tell	them
how	freely	the	goddess	gave	you	the	magical	gift	of	singing.’
He	spoke,	and	the	singer,	stirred	by	the	goddess,	began,	and	showed
them
500	his	song,	beginning	from	where	the	Argives	boarded	their	well-benched
ships,	and	sailed	away,	after	setting	fire	to	their	shelters;	but	already	all
these	others	who	were	with	famous	Odysseus
were	sitting	hidden	in	the	horse,	in	the	place	where	the	Trojans	assembled,
for	the	Trojans	themselves	had	dragged	it	up	to	the	height	of	the	city,	505
and	now	it	was	standing	there,	and	the	Trojans	seated	around	it	talked
endlessly,	and	three	ways	of	thought	found	favor,	either	to	take	the	pitiless
bronze	to	it	and	hack	open	the	hollow
horse,	or	drag	it	to	the	cliffs'	edge	and	topple	it	over,
or	let	it	stand	where	it	was	as	a	dedication	to	blandish
510	the	gods,	and	this	last	way	was	to	be	the	end	of	it,	seeing	that	the	city	was
destined	to	be	destroyed	when	it	had	inside	it	the	great	horse	made	of
wood,	with	all	the	best	of	Argives
sitting	within	and	bearing	death	and	doom	for	the	Trojans.
He	sang	then	how	the	sons	of	the	Achaians	left	their	hollow
515	hiding	place	and	streamed	from	the	horse	and	sacked	the	city,	and	he	sang
how	one	and	another	fought	through	the	steep	citadel,	and	how	in
particular	Odysseus	went,	with	godlike
Menelaos,	like	Ares,	to	find	the	house	of	Deïphobos,
and	there,	he	said,	he	endured	the	grimmest	fighting	that	ever
520	he	had,	but	won	it	there	too,	with	great-hearted	Athene	aiding.
So	the	famous	singer	sang	his	tale,	but	Odysseus	melted,	and	from
under	his	eyes	the	tears	ran	down,	drenching	his	cheeks.	As	a	woman
weeps,	lying	over	the	body
of	her	dear	husband,	who	fell	fighting	for	her	city	and	people
525	as	he	tried	to	beat	off	the	pitiless	day	from	city	and	children;	she	sees	him
dying	and	gasping	for	breath,	and	winding	her	body	about	him	she	cries
high	and	shrill,	while	the	men	behind	her,
hitting	her	with	their	spear	butts	on	the	back	and	the	shoulders,
Odysseus	is	asked	to	identify	himself
force	her	up	and	lead	her	away	into	slavery,	to	have
530	hard	work	and	sorrow,	and	her	cheeks	are	wracked	with	pitiful	weeping.
Such	were	the	pitiful	tears	Odysseus	shed	from	under	his	brows,	but	they
went	unnoticed	by	all	the	others,
but	Alkinoös	alone	understood	what	he	did	and	noticed,
since	he	was	sitting	next	him	and	heard	him	groaning	heavily.
535	At	once	he	spoke	aloud	to	the	oar-loving	Phaiakians:	‘Hear	me,	you
leaders	of	the	Phaiakians	and	men	of	counsel.
Let	Demodokos	now	give	over	his	loud	lyre	playing,
since	it	cannot	be	that	he	pleases	all	alike	with	this	song.
Ever	since	we	ate	our	supper	and	the	divine	singer
540	began,	our	guest	has	never	ceased	since	then	his	sorry	lament.	Great
sorrow	must	have	come	on	his	heart,	surely.
But	let	him	hold	now,	so	that	all	of	us,	guest	receivers
and	guest	alike,	may	enjoy	ourselves.	This	is	the	better	way,
seeing	that	all	this	has	been	done	for	the	sake	of	our	honored
545	guest,	this	escort,	these	loving	gifts	we	give	him	for	friendship.	For	any
man	whose	wits	have	hold	on	the	slightest	achievement,	his	suppliant	and
guest	is	as	good	as	a	brother	to	him.
So	do	not	longer	keep	hiding	now	with	crafty	purposes
the	truth	of	what	I	ask	you.	It	is	better	to	speak	out.
550	Tell	me	the	name	by	which	your	mother	and	father	called	you	in	that
place,	and	how	the	rest	who	live	in	the	city	about	you	call	you.	No	one
among	all	the	peoples,	neither	base	man
nor	noble,	is	altogether	nameless,	once	he	has	been	born,
but	always	his	parents	as	soon	as	they	bring	him	forth	put	upon	him
555	a	name.	Tell	me	your	land,	your	neighborhood	and	your	city,	so	that	our
ships,	straining	with	their	own	purpose,	can	carry	you	there,	for	there	are
no	steersmen	among	the	Phaiakians,	neither
are	there	any	steering	oars	for	them,	such	as	other	ships	have,
but	the	ships	themselves	understand	men's	thoughts	and	purposes,
560	and	they	know	all	the	cities	of	men	and	all	their	fertile	fields,	and	with
greatest	speed	they	cross	the	gulf	of	the	salt	sea,	huddled	under	a	mist	and
cloud,	nor	is	there	ever
any	fear	that	they	may	suffer	damage	or	come	to	destruction.
Yet	this	I	have	heard	once	on	a	time	from	my	father,	Nausithoös
565	who	said	it,	and	told	me	how	Poseidon	would	yet	be	angry	with	us,
because	we	are	convoy	without	hurt	to	all	men.
He	said	that	one	day,	as	a	well-made	ship	of	Phaiakian
Odysseus	is	invited	to	tell	his	life
men	came	back	from	a	convoy	on	the	misty	face	of	the	water,
he	would	stun	it,	and	pile	a	great	mountain	over	our	city,	to	hide	it.
570	So	the	old	man	spoke,	and	the	god	might	either	bring	it	to	pass,	or	it	might
be	left	undone,	as	the	god's	heart	pleases.
So	come	now	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer:
Where	you	were	driven	off	your	course,	what	countries	peopled
by	men	you	came	to,	the	men	themselves	and	their	strong-founded
575	cities,	and	which	were	savage	and	violent,	and	without	justice,	and	which
were	hospitable	and	with	a	godly	mind	for	strangers.
And	tell	me	why	you	weep	in	your	heart	and	make	lamentation
when	you	hear	of	the	Argives'	and	the	Danaans'	venture,	and	hear
of	Ilion.	The	gods	did	this,	and	spun	the	destruction
580	of	peoples,	for	the	sake	of	the	singing	of	men	hereafter.	Was	there	perhaps
some	kinsman	by	marriage,	wife's	father	or	brother,	a	brave	man	who
perished	before	Ilion?	Such	are	the	relatives
who	next	to	a	man's	own	blood	and	kin	come	closest	to	him?
Or	could	it	then	have	been	some	companion,	a	brave	man	knowing
585	thoughts	gracious	toward	you,	since	one	who	is	your	companion,	and	has
thoughts	honorable	toward	you,	is	of	no	less	degree	than	a	brother?'
BOOK	IX
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:	‘O	great
Alkinoös,	pre-eminent	among	all	people,
surely	indeed	it	is	a	good	thing	to	listen	to	a	singer
such	as	this	one	before	us,	who	is	like	the	gods	in	his	singing;	5	for	I	think
there	is	no	occasion	accomplished	that	is	more	pleasant	than	when	festivity
holds	sway	among	all	the	populace,
and	the	feasters	up	and	down	the	houses	are	sitting	in	order	and	listening	to
the	singer,	and	beside	them	the	tables	are	loaded	with	bread	and	meats,	and
from	the	mixing	bowl	the	wine	steward	10	draws	the	wine	and	carries	it
about	and	fills	the	cups.	This	seems	to	my	own	mind	to	be	the	best	of
occasions.
But	now	your	wish	was	inclined	to	ask	me	about	my	mournful	sufferings,
so	that	I	must	mourn	and	grieve	even	more.	What	then	shall	I	recite	to	you
first	of	all,	what	leave	till	later?
15	Many	are	the	sorrows	the	gods	of	the	sky	have	given	me.
Now	first	I	will	tell	you	my	name,	so	that	all	of	you
may	know	me,	and	I	hereafter,	escaping	the	day	without	pity,	be	your
friend	and	guest,	though	the	home	where	I	live	is	far	away	from	you.
I	am	Odysseus	son	of	Laertes,	known	before	all	men
20	for	the	study	of	crafty	designs,	and	my	fame	goes	up	to	the	heavens.
I	am	at	home	in	sunny	Ithaka.	There	is	a	mountain
there	that	stands	tall,	leaf-trembling	Neritos,	and	there	are	islands	settled
around	it,	lying	one	very	close	to	another.
Odysseus'	tale
There	is	Doulichion	and	Same,	wooded	Zakynthos,
25	but	my	island	lies	low	and	away,	last	of	all	on	the	water	toward	the	dark,
with	the	rest	below	facing	east	and	sunshine,	a	rugged	place,	but	a	good
nurse	of	men;	for	my	part
I	cannot	think	of	any	place	sweeter	on	earth	to	look	at.
For	in	truth	Kalypso,	shining	among	divinities,	kept	me
30	with	her	in	her	hollow	caverns,	desiring	me	for	her	husband,	and	so
likewise	Aiaian	Circe	the	guileful	detained	me
beside	her	in	her	halls,	desiring	me	for	her	husband,
but	never	could	she	persuade	the	heart	within	me.	So	it	is	that	nothing	is
more	sweet	in	the	end	than	country	and	parents	35	ever,	even	when	far
away	one	lives	in	a	fertile
place,	when	it	is	in	alien	country,	far	from	his	parents.
But	come,	I	will	tell	you	of	my	voyage	home	with	its	many	troubles,	which
Zeus	inflicted	on	me	as	I	came	from	Troy	land.
‘From	Ilion	the	wind	took	me	and	drove	me	ashore	at	
Ismaros
40	by	the	
Kikonians
.	I	sacked	their	city	and	killed	their	people,	and	out	of
their	city	taking	their	wives	and	many	possessions	we	shared	them	out,	so
none	might	go	cheated	of	his	proper	portion.	There	I	was	for	the	light	foot
and	escaping,
and	urged	it,	but	they	were	greatly	foolish	and	would	not	listen,	45	and
then	and	there	much	wine	was	being	drunk,	and	they	slaughtered	many
sheep	on	the	beach,	and	lumbering	horn-curved	cattle.
But	meanwhile	the	Kikonians	went	and	summoned	the	other
Kikonians,	who	were	their	neighbors	living	in	the	inland	country,	more
numerous	and	better	men,	well	skilled	in	fighting
50	men	with	horses,	but	knowing	too	at	need	the	battle
on	foot.	They	came	at	early	morning,	like	flowers	in	season	or	leaves,	and
the	luck	that	came	our	way	from	Zeus	was	evil,	to	make	us	unfortunate,	so
we	must	have	hard	pains	to	suffer.
Both	sides	stood	and	fought	their	battle	there	by	the	running	55	ships,	and
with	bronze-headed	spears	they	cast	at	each	other,	and	as	long	as	it	was
early	and	the	sacred	daylight	increasing,	so	long	we	stood	fast	and	fought
them	off,	though	there	were	more	of	them;	but	when	the	sun	had	gone	to
the	time	for	unyoking	of	cattle,	then	at	last	the	Kikonians	turned	the
Achaians	back	and	beat	them,	60	and	out	of	each	ship	six	of	my	strong-
greaved	companions	were	killed,	but	the	rest	of	us	fled	away	from	death
and	destruction.
Departure	from	Troy—the	Lotus-Eaters
‘From	there	we	sailed	on	further	along,	glad	to	have	escaped	death,	but
grieving	still	at	heart	for	the	loss	of	our	dear	companions.
Even	then	I	would	not	suffer	the	flight	of	my	oarswept	vessels	65	until	a
cry	had	been	made	three	times	for	each	of	my	wretched	companions,	who
died	there	in	the	plain,	killed	by	the	Kikonians.
Cloud-gathering	Zeus	drove	the	North	Wind	against	our	vessels	in	a
supernatural	storm,	and	huddled	under	the	cloud	scuds	land	alike	and	the
great	water.	Night	sprang	from	heaven.
70	The	ships	were	swept	along	yawing	down	the	current;	the	violence	of	the
wind	ripped	our	sails	into	three	and	four	pieces.	These	then,	in	fear	of
destruction,	we	took	down	and	stowed	in	the	ships'	hulls,	and	rowed	them
on	ourselves	until	we	had	made	the	mainland.
There	for	two	nights	and	two	days	together	we	lay	up,
75	for	pain	and	weariness	together	eating	our	hearts	out.
But	when	the	fair-haired	Dawn	in	her	rounds	brought	on	the	third	day,	we,
setting	the	masts	upright,	and	hoisting	the	white	sails	on	them,	sat	still,	and
let	the	wind	and	the	steersmen	hold	them	steady.
And	now	I	would	have	come	home	unscathed	to	the	land	of	my	fathers,	80
but	as	I	turned	the	hook	of	Maleia,	the	sea	and	current
and	the	North	Wind	beat	me	off	course,	and	drove	me	on	past	
Kythera
.
‘Nine	days	then	I	was	swept	along	by	the	force	of	the	hostile
winds	on	the	fishy	sea,	but	on	the	tenth	day	we	landed
in	the	country	of	the	
Lotus-Eaters
,	who	live	on	a	flowering	85	food,	and
there	we	set	foot	on	the	mainland,	and	fetched	water,	and	my	companions
soon	took	their	supper	there	by	the	fast	ships.
But	after	we	had	tasted	of	food	and	drink,	then	I	sent
some	of	my	companions	ahead,	telling	them	to	find	out
what	men,	eaters	of	bread,	might	live	here	in	this	country.
90	I	chose	two	men,	and	sent	a	third	with	them,	as	a	herald.
My	men	went	on	and	presently	met	the	Lotus-Eaters,
nor	did	these	Lotus-Eaters	have	any	thoughts	of	destroying	our
companions,	but	they	only	gave	them	lotus	to	taste	of.
But	any	of	them	who	ate	the	honey-sweet	fruit	of	lotus
95	was	unwilling	to	take	any	message	back,	or	to	go
away,	but	they	wanted	to	stay	there	with	the	lotus-eating	people,	feeding	on
lotus,	and	forget	the	way	home.	I	myself	took	these	men	back	weeping,	by
force,	to	where	the	ships	were,	and	put	them	aboard	under	the	rowing
benches	and	tied	them	100	fast,	then	gave	the	order	to	the	rest	of	my	eager
Arrival	at	the	island
companions	to	embark	on	the	ships	in	haste,	for	fear
someone	else	might	taste	of	the	lotus	and	forget	the	way	home,	and	the
men	quickly	went	aboard	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks,	and	sitting	well	in	order
dashed	the	oars	in	the	gray	sea.
105	‘From	there,	grieving	still	at	heart,	we	sailed	on	further	along,	and
reached	the	country	of	the	lawless	outrageous	
Cyclopes
	who,	putting	all
their	trust	in	the	immortal	gods,	neither	plow	with	their	hands	nor	plant
anything,
but	all	grows	for	them	without	seed	planting,	without	cultivation,	110
wheat	and	barley	and	also	the	grapevines,	which	yield	for	them	wine	of
strength,	and	it	is	Zeus'	rain	that	waters	it	for	them.
These	people	have	no	institutions,	no	meetings	for	counsels;	rather	they
make	their	habitations	in	caverns	hollowed
among	the	peaks	of	the	high	mountains,	and	each	one	is	the	law	115	for	his
own	wives	and	children,	and	cares	nothing	about	the	others.
‘There	is	a	wooded	island	that	spreads,	away	from	the	harbor,
neither	close	in	to	the	land	of	the	Cyclopes	nor	far	out	from	it;	forested;
wild	goats	beyond	number	breed	there,	for	there	is	no	coming	and	going	of
human	kind	to	disturb	them,	120	nor	are	they	visited	by	hunters,	who	in	the
forest
suffer	hardships	as	they	haunt	the	peaks	of	the	mountains,	neither	again	is
it	held	by	herded	flocks,	nor	farmers,
but	all	its	days,	never	plowed	up	and	never	planted,
it	goes	without	people	and	supports	the	bleating	wild	goats.
125	For	the	Cyclopes	have	no	ships	with	cheeks	of	vermilion,	nor	have	they
builders	of	ships	among	them,	who	could	have	made	them	strong-benched
vessels,	and	these	if	made	could	have	run	them	sailings	to	all	the	various
cities	of	men,	in	the	way	that	people	cross	the	sea	by	means	of	ships	and
visit	each	other,
130	and	they	could	have	made	this	island	a	strong	settlement	for	them.
For	it	is	not	a	bad	place	at	all,	it	could	bear	all	crops	in	season,	and	there
are	meadow	lands	near	the	shores	of	the	gray	sea,	well	watered	and	soft;
there	could	be	grapes	grown	there	endlessly,	and	there	is	smooth	land	for
plowing,	men	could	reap	a	full	harvest	135	always	in	season,	since	there	is
very	rich	subsoil.	Also	there	is	an	easy	harbor,	with	no	need	for	a	hawser
nor	anchor	stones	to	be	thrown	ashore	nor	cables	to	make	fast;	one	could
just	run	ashore	and	wait	for	the	time	when	the	sailors'
desire	stirred	them	to	go	and	the	right	winds	were	blowing.
off	the	land	of	the	Cyclopes
140	Also	at	the	head	of	the	harbor	there	runs	bright	water,	spring	beneath
rock,	and	there	are	black	poplars	growing	around	it.
There	we	sailed	ashore,	and	there	was	some	god	guiding
us	in	through	the	gloom	of	the	night,	nothing	showed	to	look	at,	for	there
was	a	deep	mist	around	the	ships,	nor	was	there	any	moon	145	showing	in
the	sky,	but	she	was	under	the	clouds	and	hidden.
There	was	none	of	us	there	whose	eyes	had	spied	out	the	island,	and	we
never	saw	any	long	waves	rolling	in	and	breaking
on	the	shore,	but	the	first	thing	was	when	we	beached	the	well-benched
vessels.
Then	after	we	had	beached	the	ships	we	took	all	the	sails	down,	150	and
we	ourselves	stepped	out	onto	the	break	of	the	sea	beach,	and	there	we	fell
asleep	and	waited	for	the	divine	Dawn.
‘But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
we	made	a	tour	about	the	island,	admiring	everything
there,	and	the	nymphs,	daughters	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis,	started	155	the	hill-
roving	goats	our	way	for	my	companions	to	feast	on.
At	once	we	went	and	took	from	the	ships	curved	bows	and	javelins	with
long	sockets,	and	arranging	ourselves	in	three	divisions	cast	about,	and	the
god	granted	us	the	game	we	longed	for.
Now	there	were	twelve	ships	that	went	with	me,	and	for	each	one	nine
goats	160	were	portioned	out,	but	I	alone	had	ten	for	my	portion.
So	for	the	whole	length	of	the	day	until	the	sun's	setting,	we	sat	there
feasting	on	unlimited	meat	and	sweet	wine;
for	the	red	wine	had	not	yet	given	out	in	the	ships,	there	was	some	still	left,
for	we	all	had	taken	away	a	great	deal
165	in	storing	jars	when	we	stormed	the	Kikonians'	sacred	citadel.
We	looked	across	at	the	land	of	the	Cyclopes,	and	they	were	near	by,	and
we	saw	their	smoke	and	heard	sheep	and	goats	bleating.
But	when	the	sun	went	down	and	the	sacred	darkness	came	over,	then	we
lay	down	to	sleep	along	the	break	of	the	seashore;	170	but	when	the	young
Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,	then	I	held	an	assembly	and
spoke	forth	before	all:
“The	rest	of	you,	who	are	my	eager	companions,	wait	here,	while	I,	with
my	own	ship	and	companions	that	are	in	it,	go	and	find	out	about	these
people,	and	learn	what	they	are,	175	whether	they	are	savage	and	violent,
and	without	justice,	or	hospitable	to	strangers	and	with	minds	that	are
godly.”
Odysseus	and	his	companions
‘So	speaking	I	went	aboard	the	ship	and	told	my	companions
also	to	go	aboard,	and	to	cast	off	the	stern	cables,
and	quickly	they	went	aboard	the	ship	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks,	180	and
sitting	well	in	order	dashed	the	oars	in	the	gray	sea.
But	when	we	had	arrived	at	the	place,	which	was	nearby,	there	at	the	edge
of	the	land	we	saw	the	cave,	close	to	the	water,	high,	and	overgrown	with
laurels,	and	in	it	were	stabled	great	flocks,	sheep	and	goats	alike,	and	there
was	a	fenced	yard	185	built	around	it	with	a	high	wall	of	grubbed-out
boulders	and	tall	pines	and	oaks	with	lofty	foliage.	Inside
there	lodged	a	monster	of	a	man,	who	now	was	herding
the	flocks	at	a	distance	away,	alone,	for	he	did	not	range	with	others,	but
stayed	away	by	himself;	his	mind	was	lawless,	190	and	in	truth	he	was	a
monstrous	wonder	made	to	behold,	not	like	a	man,	an	eater	of	bread,	but
more	like	a	wooded
peak	of	the	high	mountains	seen	standing	away	from	the	others.
‘At	that	time	I	told	the	rest	of	my	eager	companions
to	stay	where	they	were	beside	the	ship	and	guard	it.	Meanwhile	195	I,
choosing	out	the	twelve	best	men	among	my	companions,	went	on,	but	I
had	with	me	a	goatskin	bottle	of	black	wine,	sweet	wine,	given	me	by
Maron
,	son	of	
Euanthes
and	priest	of	Apollo,	who	bestrides	Ismaros;	he	gave	it
because,	respecting	him	with	his	wife	and	child,	we	saved	them	200	from
harm.	He	made	his	dwelling	among	the	trees	of	the	sacred	grove	of
Phoibos	Apollo,	and	he	gave	me	glorious	presents.
He	gave	me	seven	talents	of	well-wrought	gold,	and	he	gave	me	a	mixing
bowl	made	all	of	silver,	and	gave	along	with	it	wine,	drawing	it	off	in
storing	jars,	twelve	in	all.	This	was	205	a	sweet	wine,	unmixed,	a	divine
drink.	No	one	of	his	servants	or	thralls	that	were	in	his	household	knew
anything	about	it,	but	only	himself	and	his	dear	wife	and	a	single
housekeeper.
Whenever	he	drank	this	honey-sweet	red	wine,	he	would	pour	out	enough
to	fill	one	cup,	then	twenty	measures	of	water
210	were	added,	and	the	mixing	bowl	gave	off	a	sweet	smell;	magical;	then
would	be	no	pleasure	in	holding	off.	Of	this	wine	I	filled	a	great	wineskin
full,	and	took	too	provisions	in	a	bag,	for	my	proud	heart	had	an	idea	that
presently
I	would	encounter	a	man	who	was	endowed	with	great	strength,	215	and
wild,	with	no	true	knowledge	of	laws	or	any	good	customs.
in	the	cave	of	Polyphemos
‘Lightly	we	made	our	way	to	the	cave,	but	we	did	not	find	him
there,	he	was	off	herding	on	the	range	with	his	fat	flocks.
We	went	inside	the	cave	and	admired	everything	inside	it.
Baskets	were	there,	heavy	with	cheeses,	and	the	pens	crowded	220	with
lambs	and	kids.	They	had	all	been	divided	into	separate	groups,	the
firstlings	in	one	place,	and	then	the	middle	ones,	the	babies	again	by
themselves.	And	all	his	vessels,	milk	pails	and	pans,	that	he	used	for
milking	into,	were	running	over	with	whey.	From	the	start	my	companions
spoke	to	me	and	begged	me	225	to	take	some	of	the	cheeses,	come	back
again,	and	the	next	time	to	drive	the	lambs	and	kids	from	their	pens,	and
get	back	quickly	to	the	ship	again,	and	go	sailing	off	across	the	salt	water;
but	I	would	not	listen	to	them,	it	would	have	been	better	their	way,	not	until
I	could	see	him,	see	if	he	would	give	me	presents.
230	My	friends	were	to	find	the	sight	of	him	in	no	way	lovely.
‘There	we	built	a	fire	and	made	sacrifice,	and	helping
ourselves	to	the	cheeses	we	ate	and	sat	waiting	for	him
inside,	until	he	came	home	from	his	herding.	He	carried	a	heavy	load	of
dried-out	wood,	to	make	a	fire	for	his	dinner,
235	and	threw	it	down	inside	the	cave,	making	a	terrible
crash,	so	in	fear	we	scuttled	away	into	the	cave's	corners.
Next	he	drove	into	the	wide	cavern	all	from	the	fat	flocks	that	he	would
milk,	but	he	left	all	the	male	animals,	billygoats	and	rams,	outside	in	his
yard	with	the	deep	fences.	Next	thing,	240	he	heaved	up	and	set	into
position	the	huge	door	stop,
a	massive	thing;	no	twenty-two	of	the	best	four-wheeled
wagons	could	have	taken	that	weight	off	the	ground	and	carried	it,	such	a
piece	of	sky-towering	cliff	that	was	he	set	over
his	gateway.	Next	he	sat	down	and	milked	his	sheep	and	his	bleating	245
goats,	each	of	them	in	order,	and	put	lamb	or	kid	under	each	one	to	suck,
and	then	drew	off	half	of	the	white	milk	and	put	it	by	in	baskets	made	of
wickerwork,	stored	for	cheeses,
but	let	the	other	half	stand	in	the	milk	pails	so	as	to	have	it	to	help	himself
to	and	drink	from,	and	it	would	serve	for	his	supper.
250	But	after	he	had	briskly	done	all	his	chores	and	finished,	at	last	he	lit	the
fire,	and	saw	us,	and	asked	us	a	question:	“Strangers,	who	are	you?	From
where	do	you	come	sailing	over	the	watery	ways?	Is	it	on	some	business,
or	are	you	recklessly	roving	as	pirates	do,	when	they	sail	on	the	salt	sea
and	venture
In	the	cave	of	Polyphemos
255	their	lives	as	they	wander,	bringing	evil	to	alien	people?”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	the	inward	heart	in	us	was	broken
in	terror	of	the	deep	voice	and	for	seeing	him	so	monstrous;	but	even	so	I
had	words	for	an	answer,	and	I	said	to	him:	“We	are	Achaians	coming	from
Troy,	beaten	off	our	true	course	260	by	winds	from	every	direction	across
the	great	gulf	of	the	open	sea,	making	for	home,	by	the	wrong	way,	on	the
wrong	courses.
So	we	have	come.	So	it	has	pleased	Zeus	to	arrange	it.
We	claim	we	are	of	the	following	of	the	son	of	Atreus,
Agamemnon,	whose	fame	now	is	the	greatest	thing	under	heaven,	265	such
a	city	was	that	he	sacked	and	destroyed	so	many
people;	but	now	in	turn	we	come	to	you	and	are	suppliants	at	your	knees,	if
you	might	give	us	a	guest	present	or	otherwise	some	gift	of	grace,	for	such
is	the	right	of	strangers.	Therefore	respect	the	gods,	O	best	of	men.	We	are
your	suppliants,	270	and	Zeus	the	guest	god,	who	stands	behind	all
strangers	with	honors	due	them,	avenges	any	wrong	toward	strangers	and
suppliants.”
‘So	I	spoke,	but	he	answered	me	in	pitiless	spirit:
“Stranger,	you	are	a	simple	fool,	or	come	from	far	off,
when	you	tell	me	to	avoid	the	wrath	of	the	gods	or	fear	them.
275	The	Cyclopes	do	not	concern	themselves	over	Zeus	of	the	aegis,	nor	any
of	the	rest	of	the	blessed	gods,	since	we	are	far	better	than	they,	and	for
fear	of	the	hate	of	Zeus	I	would	not	spare	you	or	your	companions	either,
if	the	fancy	took	me
otherwise.	But	tell	me,	so	I	may	know:	where	did	you
280	put	your	well-made	ship	when	you	came?	Nearby	or	far	off?”
‘So	he	spoke,	trying	me	out,	but	I	knew	too	much	and	was	not
deceived,	but	answered	him	in	turn,	and	my	words	were	crafty:	“Poseidon,
Shaker	of	the	Earth,	has	shattered	my	vessel.
He	drove	it	against	the	rocks	on	the	outer	coast	of	your	country,	285
cracked	on	a	cliff,	it	is	gone,	the	wind	on	the	sea	took	it;	but	I,	with	these
you	see,	got	away	from	sudden	destruction.”
‘So	I	spoke,	but	he	in	pitiless	spirit	answered
nothing,	but	sprang	up	and	reached	for	my	companions,
caught	up	two	together	and	slapped	them,	like	killing	puppies,	290	against
the	ground,	and	the	brains	ran	all	over	the	floor,	soaking	the	ground.	Then
he	cut	them	up	limb	by	limb	and	got	supper	ready,	and	like	a	lion	reared	in
the	hills,	without	leaving	anything,	ate	them,	entrails,	flesh	and	the
marrowy	bones	alike.	We
The	men	being	eaten,	two	at	a	time
cried	out	aloud	and	held	our	hands	up	to	Zeus,	seeing
295	the	cruelty	of	what	he	did,	but	our	hearts	were	helpless.
But	when	the	Cyclops	had	filled	his	enormous	stomach,	feeding	on	human
flesh	and	drinking	down	milk	unmixed	with	water,	he	lay	down	to	sleep	in
the	cave	sprawled	out	through	his	sheep.	Then	I	took	counsel	with	myself
in	my	great-hearted	spirit
300	to	go	up	close,	drawing	from	beside	my	thigh	the	sharp	sword,	and	stab
him	in	the	chest,	where	the	midriff	joins	on	the	liver,	feeling	for	the	place
with	my	hand;	but	the	second	thought	stayed	me;	for	there	we	too	would
have	perished	away	in	sheer	destruction,	seeing	that	our	hands	could	never
have	pushed	from	the	lofty	305	gate	of	the	cave	the	ponderous	boulder	he
had	propped	there.
So	mourning	we	waited,	just	as	we	were,	for	the	divine	Dawn.
‘But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
he	lit	his	fire,	and	then	set	about	milking	his	glorious	flocks,	each	of	them
in	order,	and	put	lamb	or	kid	under	each	one.
310	But	after	he	had	briskly	done	all	his	chores	and	finished,	again	he
snatched	up	two	men,	and	prepared	them	for	dinner,	and	when	he	had
dined,	drove	his	fat	flocks	out	of	the	cavern,	easily	lifting	off	the	great
doorstone,	but	then	he	put	it	back	again,	like	a	man	closing	the	lid	on	a
quiver.
315	And	so	the	Cyclops,	whistling	loudly,	guided	his	fat	flocks	to	the	hills,
leaving	me	there	in	the	cave	mumbling	my	black	thoughts	of	how	I	might
punish	him,	how	Athene	might	give	me	that	glory.
And	as	I	thought,	this	was	the	plan	that	seemed	best	to	me.
The	Cyclops	had	lying	there	beside	the	pen	a	great	bludgeon	320	of	olive
wood,	still	green.	He	had	cut	it	so	that	when	it	dried	out	he	could	carry	it
about,	and	we	looking	at	it	considered	it	to	be	about	the	size	for	the	mast	of
a	cargo-carrying	broad	black	ship	of	twenty	oars	which	crosses	the	open
sea;	such	was	the	length	of	it,	such	the	thickness,	to	judge	by	325	looking.	I
went	up	and	chopped	a	length	of	about	a	fathom,	and	handed	it	over	to	my
companions	and	told	them	to	shave	it	down,	and	they	made	it	smooth,
while	I	standing	by	them	sharpened	the	point,	then	put	it	over	the	blaze	of
the	fire	to	harden.
Then	I	put	it	well	away	and	hid	it	under	the	ordure
330	which	was	all	over	the	floor	of	the	cave,	much	stuff	lying	about.	Next	I
told	the	rest	of	the	men	to	cast	lots,	to	find	out	which	of	them	must	endure
with	me	to	take	up	the	great	beam
The	blinding	of	the	drunken	Polyphemos
and	spin	it	in	Cyclops'	eye	when	sweet	sleep	had	come	over	him.
The	ones	drew	it	whom	I	myself	would	have	wanted	chosen,	335	four	men,
and	I	myself	was	the	fifth,	and	allotted	with	them.
With	the	evening	he	came	back	again,	herding	his	fleecy
flocks,	but	drove	all	his	fat	flocks	inside	the	wide	cave	at	once,	and	did	not
leave	any	outside	in	the	yard	with	the	deep	fence,	whether	he	had	some
idea,	or	whether	a	god	so	urged	him.
340	When	he	had	heaved	up	and	set	in	position	the	huge	door	stop,	next	he	sat
down	and	started	milking	his	sheep	and	his	bleating	goats,	each	of	them	in
order,	and	put	lamb	or	kid	under	each	one.
But	after	he	had	briskly	done	all	his	chores	and	finished,	again	he	snatched
up	two	men	and	prepared	them	for	dinner.
345	Then	at	last	I,	holding	in	my	hands	an	ivy	bowl
full	of	the	black	wine,	stood	close	up	to	the	Cyclops	and	spoke	out:	“Here,
Cyclops,	have	a	drink	of	wine,	now	you	have	fed	on	human	flesh,	and	see
what	kind	of	drink	our	ship	carried	inside	her.	I	brought	it	for	you,	and	it
would	have	been	your	libation	350	had	you	taken	pity	and	sent	me	home,
but	I	cannot	suffer	your	rages.	Cruel,	how	can	any	man	come	and	visit
you	ever	again,	now	you	have	done	what	has	no	sanction?”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	he	took	it	and	drank	it	off,	and	was	terribly
pleased	with	the	wine	he	drank	and	questioned	me	again,	saying:	355
“Give	me	still	more,	freely,	and	tell	me	your	name	straightway	now,	so	I
can	give	you	a	guest	present	to	make	you	happy.
For	the	grain-giving	land	of	the	Cyclopes	also	yields	them	wine	of
strength,	and	it	is	Zeus'	rain	that	waters	it	for	them;	but	this	comes	from
where	ambrosia	and	nectar	flow	in	abundance.”
360	‘So	he	spoke,	and	I	gave	him	the	gleaming	wine	again.	Three	times	I
brought	it	to	him	and	gave	it	to	him,	three	times	he	recklessly	drained	it,
but	when	the	wine	had	got	into	the	brains	of	the	Cyclops,	then	I	spoke	to
him,	and	my	words	were	full	of	beguilement:	“Cyclops,	you	ask	me	for
my	famous	name.	I	will	tell	you	365	then,	but	you	must	give	me	a	guest
gift	as	you	have	promised.
Nobody	is	my	name.	My	father	and	mother	call	me
Nobody,	as	do	all	the	others	who	are	my	companions.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	he	answered	me	in	pitiless	spirit:
“Then	I	will	eat	Nobody	after	his	friends,	and	the	others	370	I	will	eat	first,
and	that	shall	be	my	guest	present	to	you.”
‘He	spoke	and	slumped	away	and	fell	on	his	back,	and	lay	there
Trick	of	“Nobody”
with	his	thick	neck	crooked	over	on	one	side,	and	sleep	who	subdues	all
came	on	and	captured	him,	and	the	wine	gurgled	up	from	his	gullet	with
gobs	of	human	meat.	This	was	his	drunken	vomiting.
375	Then	I	shoved	the	beam	underneath	a	deep	bed	of	cinders,	waiting	for	it
to	heat,	and	I	spoke	to	all	my	companions	in	words	of	courage,	so	none
should	be	in	a	panic,	and	back	out;	but	when	the	beam	of	olive,	green	as	it
was,	was	nearly
at	the	point	of	catching	fire	and	glowed,	terribly	incandescent,	380	then	I
brought	it	close	up	from	the	fire	and	my	friends	about	me	stood	fast.	Some
great	divinity	breathed	courage	into	us.
They	seized	the	beam	of	olive,	sharp	at	the	end,	and	leaned	on	it	into	the
eye,	while	I	from	above	leaning	my	weight	on	it	twirled	it,	like	a	man	with
a	brace-and-bit	who	bores	into	385	a	ship	timber,	and	his	men	from
underneath,	grasping
the	strap	on	either	side	whirl	it,	and	it	bites	resolutely	deeper.
So	seizing	the	fire-point-hardened	timber	we	twirled	it
in	his	eye,	and	the	blood	boiled	around	the	hot	point,	so	that	the	blast	and
scorch	of	the	burning	ball	singed	all	his	eyebrows	390	and	eyelids,	and	the
fire	made	the	roots	of	his	eye	crackle.
As	when	a	man	who	works	as	a	blacksmith	plunges	a	screaming	great	ax
blade	or	plane	into	cold	water,	treating	it
for	temper,	since	this	is	the	way	steel	is	made	strong,	even	so	Cyclops'	eye
sizzled	about	the	beam	of	the	olive.
395	He	gave	a	giant	horrible	cry	and	the	rocks	rattled
to	the	sound,	and	we	scuttled	away	in	fear.	He	pulled	the	timber	out	of	his
eye,	and	it	blubbered	with	plenty	of	blood,	then	when	he	had	frantically
taken	it	in	his	hands	and	thrown	it	away,	he	cried	aloud	to	the	other
Cyclopes,	who	live
400	around	him	in	their	own	caves	along	the	windy	pinnacles.
They	hearing	him	came	swarming	up	from	their	various	places,	and	stood
around	the	cave	and	asked	him	what	was	his	trouble:	“Why,	Polyphemos,
what	do	you	want	with	all	this	outcry
through	the	immortal	night	and	have	made	us	all	thus	sleepless?
405	Surely	no	mortal	against	your	will	can	be	driving	your	sheep	off?
Surely	none	can	be	killing	you	by	force	or	treachery?”
‘Then	from	inside	the	cave	strong	Polyphemos	answered:
“Good	friends,	Nobody	is	killing	me	by	force	or	treachery.”
‘So	then	the	others	speaking	in	winged	words	gave	him	an	answer:	410	“If
alone	as	you	are	none	uses	violence	on	you,
Escape	from	the	cave
why,	there	is	no	avoiding	the	sickness	sent	by	great	Zeus;	so	you	had	better
pray	to	your	father,	the	lord	Poseidon.”
‘So	they	spoke	as	they	went	away,	and	the	heart	within	me
laughed	over	how	my	name	and	my	perfect	planning	had	fooled	him.
415	But	the	Cyclops,	groaning	aloud	and	in	the	pain	of	his	agony,	felt	with	his
hands,	and	took	the	boulder	out	of	the	doorway,	and	sat	down	in	the
entrance	himself,	spreading	his	arms	wide,	to	catch	anyone	who	tried	to
get	out	with	the	sheep,	hoping	that	I	would	be	so	guileless	in	my	heart	as
to	try	this;	420	but	I	was	planning	so	that	things	would	come	out	the	best
way,	and	trying	to	find	some	release	from	death,	for	my	companions	and
myself	too,	combining	all	my	resource	and	treacheries,	as	with	life	at
stake,	for	the	great	evil	was	very	close	to	us.
And	as	I	thought,	this	was	the	plan	that	seemed	best	to	me.
425	There	were	some	male	sheep,	rams,	well	nourished,	thick	and	fleecy,
handsome	and	large,	with	a	dark	depth	of	of	wool.	Silently	I	caught	these
and	lashed	them	together	with	pliant	willow	withes,	where	the	monstrous
Cyclops	lawless	of	mind	had	used	to	sleep.	I	had	them	in	threes,	and	the
one	in	the	middle	carried	430	a	man,	while	the	other	two	went	on	each
side,	so	guarding	my	friends.	Three	rams	carried	each	man,	but	as	for
myself,	there	was	one	ram,	far	the	finest	of	all	the	flock.	This	one	I
clasped	around	the	back,	snuggled	under	the	wool	of	the	belly,	and	stayed
there	still,	and	with	a	firm	twist	of	the	hands	and	enduring	435	spirit	clung
fast	to	the	glory	of	this	fleece,	unrelenting.
So	we	grieved	for	the	time	and	waited	for	the	divine	Dawn.
‘But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
then	the	male	sheep	hastened	out	of	the	cave,	toward	pasture,	but	the	ewes
were	bleating	all	through	the	pens	unmilked,	their	udders	440	ready	to
burst.	Meanwhile	their	master,	suffering	and	in	bitter	pain,	felt	over	the
backs	of	all	his	sheep,	standing	up	as	they	were,	but	in	his	guilelessness	did
not	notice	how	my	men	were	fastened	under	the	breasts	of	his	fleecy	sheep.
Last	of	all	the	flock	the	ram	went	out	of	the	doorway,	445	loaded	with	his
own	fleece,	and	with	me,	and	my	close	counsels.
Then,	feeling	him,	powerful	Polyphemos	spoke	a	word	to	him:	“My	dear
old	ram,	why	are	you	thus	leaving	the	cave	last	of	the	sheep?	Never	in	the
old	days	were	you	left	behind	by	the	flock,	but	long-striding,	far	ahead	of
the	rest	would	pasture	450	on	the	tender	bloom	of	the	grass,	be	first	at
running	rivers,
and	rocks	thrown	by	Polyphemos
and	be	eager	always	to	lead	the	way	first	back	to	the	sheepfold	at	evening.
Now	you	are	last	of	all.	Perhaps	you	are	grieving	for	your	master's	eye,
which	a	bad	man	with	his	wicked	companions	put	out,	after	he	had	made
my	brain	helpless	with	wine,	this	455	Nobody,	who	I	think	has	not	yet	got
clear	of	destruction.
If	only	you	could	think	like	us	and	only	be	given
a	voice,	to	tell	me	where	he	is	skulking	away	from	my	anger,	then	surely
he	would	be	smashed	against	the	floor	and	his	brains	go	spattering	all	over
the	cave	to	make	my	heart	lighter
460	from	the	burden	of	all	the	evils	this	niddering	Nobody	gave	me.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	sent	the	ram	along	from	him,	outdoors,
and	when	we	had	got	a	little	way	from	the	yard	and	the	cavern,	first	I	got
myself	loose	from	my	ram,	then	set	my	companions	free,	and	rapidly	then,
and	with	many	a	backward	glance,	we	465	drove	the	long-striding	sheep,
rich	with	fat,	until	we	reached	our	ship,	and	the	sight	of	us	who	had
escaped	death	was	welcome	to	our	companions,	but	they	began	to	mourn
for	the	others;	only	I	would	not	let	them	cry	out,	but	with	my	brows
nodded	to	each	man,	and	told	them	to	be	quick	and	to	load	the	fleecy	470
sheep	on	board	our	vessel	and	sail	out	on	the	salt	water.
Quickly	they	went	aboard	the	ship	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks,	and	sitting	well
in	order	dashed	the	oars	in	the	gray	sea.
But	when	I	was	as	far	from	the	land	as	a	voice	shouting
carries,	I	called	out	aloud	to	the	Cyclops,	taunting	him:	475	“Cyclops,	in
the	end	it	was	no	weak	man's	companions
you	were	to	eat	by	violence	and	force	in	your	hollow
cave,	and	your	evil	deeds	were	to	catch	up	with	you,	and	be	too	strong	for
you,	hard	one,	who	dared	to	eat	your	own	guests	in	your	own	house,	so
Zeus	and	the	rest	of	the	gods	have	punished	you.”
480	‘So	I	spoke,	and	still	more	the	heart	in	him	was	angered.	He	broke	away
the	peak	of	a	great	mountain	and	let	it	fly,	and	threw	it	in	front	of	the	dark-
prowed	ship	by	only	a	little,	it	just	failed	to	graze	the	steering	oar's	edge,
but	the	sea	washed	up	in	the	splash	as	the	stone	went	under,	the	tidal	485
wave	it	made	swept	us	suddenly	back	from	the	open
sea	to	the	mainland	again,	and	forced	us	on	shore.	Then	I	caught	up	in	my
hands	the	very	long	pole	and	pushed	her
clear	again,	and	urged	my	companions	with	words,	and	nodding	with	my
head,	to	throw	their	weight	on	the	oars	and	bring	us	490	out	of	the
threatening	evil,	and	they	leaned	on	and	rowed	hard.
The	curse	of	Polyphemos
But	when	we	had	cut	through	the	sea	to	twice	the	previous	distance,	again	I
started	to	call	to	Cyclops,	but	my	friends	about	me	checked	me,	first	one
then	another	speaking,	trying	to	soothe	me:	“Hard	one,	why	are	you	trying
once	more	to	stir	up	this	savage	495	man,	who	just	now	threw	his	missile
in	the	sea,	forcing	our	ship	to	the	land	again,	and	we	thought	once	more	we
were	finished;	and	if	he	had	heard	a	voice	or	any	one	of	us	speaking,
he	would	have	broken	all	our	heads	and	our	ship's	timbers	with	a	cast	of	a
great	jagged	stone,	so	strong	is	his	throwing.”
500	‘So	they	spoke,	but	could	not	persuade	the	great	heart	in	me,	but	once
again	in	the	anger	of	my	heart	I	cried	to	him:	“Cyclops,	if	any	mortal	man
ever	asks	you	who	it	was
that	inflicted	upon	your	eye	this	shameful	blinding,
tell	him	that	you	were	blinded	by	Odysseus,	sacker	of	cities.
505	Laertes	is	his	father,	and	he	makes	his	home	in	Ithaka.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	he	groaned	aloud	and	answered	me,	saying:
“Ah	now,	a	prophecy	spoken	of	old	is	come	to	completion.
There	used	to	be	a	man	here,	great	and	strong,	and	a	prophet,	
Telemos
,
Eurymos
'	son,	who	for	prophecy	was	pre-eminent	510	and	grew	old	as	a
prophet	among	the	Cyclopes.	This	man	told	me	how	all	this	that	has
happened	now	must	someday	be	accomplished,	and	how	I	must	lose	the
sight	of	my	eye	at	the	hands	of	Odysseus.
But	always	I	was	on	the	lookout	for	a	man	handsome
and	tall,	with	great	endowment	of	strength	on	him,	to	come	here;	515	but
now	the	end	of	it	is	that	a	little	man,	niddering,	feeble,	has	taken	away	the
sight	of	my	eye,	first	making	me	helpless	with	wine.	So	come	here,
Odysseus,	let	me	give	you	a	guest	gift	and	urge	the	glorious	Shaker	of	the
Earth	to	grant	you	conveyance	home.	For	I	am	his	son,	he	announces
himself	as	my	father.
520	He	himself	will	heal	me,	if	he	will,	but	not	any	other
one	of	the	blessed	gods,	nor	any	man	who	is	mortal.”
‘So	he	spoke,	but	I	answered	him	again	and	said	to	him:
“I	only	wish	it	were	certain	I	could	make	you	reft	of	spirit	and	life,	and
send	you	to	the	house	of	Hades,	as	it	is	certain	525	that	not	even	the	Shaker
of	the	Earth	will	ever	heal	your	eye	for	you.”
‘So	I	spoke,	but	he	then	called	to	the	lord	Poseidon
in	prayer,	reaching	both	arms	up	toward	the	starry	heaven:	“Hear	me,
Poseidon	who	circle	the	earth,	dark-haired.	If	truly	I	am	your	son,	and	you
acknowledge	yourself	as	my	father,
and	his	prayer	to	Poseidon
530	grant	that	Odysseus,	sacker	of	cities,	son	of	Laertes,
who	makes	his	home	in	Ithaka,	may	never	reach	that	home;	but	if	it	is
decided	that	he	shall	see	his	own	people,
and	come	home	to	his	strong-founded	house	and	to	his	own	country,	let
him	come	late,	in	bad	case,	with	the	loss	of	all	his	companions,	535	in
someone	else's	ship,	and	find	troubles	in	his	household.”
‘So	he	spoke	in	prayer,	and	the	dark-haired	god	heard	him.
Then	for	the	second	time	lifting	a	stone	far	greater
he	whirled	it	and	threw,	leaning	into	the	cast	his	strength	beyond	measure,
and	the	stone	fell	behind	the	dark-prowed	ship	by	only
540	a	little,	it	just	failed	to	graze	the	steering	oar's	edge,	and	the	sea	washed
up	in	the	splash	as	the	stone	went	under;	the	tidal	wave	drove	us	along
forward	and	forced	us	onto	the	island.
But	after	we	had	so	made	the	island,	where	all	the	rest	of	our	strong-
benched	ships	were	waiting	together,	and	our	companions	545	were	sitting
about	them	grieving,	having	waited	so	long	for	us,	making	this	point	we
ran	our	ship	on	the	sand	and	beached	her,	and	we	ourselves	stepped	out
onto	the	break	of	the	sea	beach,	and	from	the	hollow	ships	bringing	out	the
flocks	of	the	Cyclops	we	shared	them	out	so	none	might	go	cheated	of	his
proper	550	portion;	but	for	me	alone	my	strong-greaved	companions
excepted	the	ram	when	the	sheep	were	shared,	and	I	sacrificed	him	on	the
sands	to	Zeus,	dark-clouded	son	of	Kronos,	lord	over	all,	and	burned	him
the	thighs;	but	he	was	not	moved	by	my	offerings,	but	still	was	pondering
on	a	way	how	all	my	strong-benched	555	ships	should	be	destroyed	and	all
my	eager	companions.
So	for	the	whole	length	of	the	day	until	the	sun's	setting,	we	sat	there
feasting	on	unlimited	meat	and	sweet	wine.
But	when	the	sun	went	down	and	the	sacred	darkness	came	over,	then	we
lay	down	to	sleep	along	the	break	of	the	seashore;	560	but	when	the	young
Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,	then	I	urged	on	the	rest	of	my
companions	and	told	them
to	go	aboard	their	ships	and	to	cast	off	the	stern	cables,	and	quickly	they
went	aboard	the	ships	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks,	and	sitting	well	in	order
dashed	their	oars	in	the	gray	sea.
565	From	there	we	sailed	on	further	along,	glad	to	have	escaped	death,	but
grieving	still	at	heart	for	the	loss	of	our	dear	companions.
BOOK	X
‘We	came	next	to	the	Aiolian	island,	where
Aiolos
lived,
Hippotas'
	son,	beloved	by	the	immortal	gods,	on	a	floating	island,	the
whole	enclosed	by	a	rampart	of	bronze,	not	to	be	broken,	and	the	sheer	of
the	cliff	runs	upward	5	to	it;	and	twelve	children	were	born	to	him	in	his
palace,
six	of	them	daughters,	and	six	sons	in	the	pride	of	their	youth,	so	he
bestowed	his	daughters	on	his	sons,	to	be	their	consorts.
And	evermore,	beside	their	dear	father	and	gracious	mother,	these	feast,
and	good	things	beyond	number	are	set	before	them;	10	and	all	their	days
the	house	fragrant	with	food	echoes
in	the	courtyard,	but	their	nights	they	sleep	each	one	by	his	modest	wife,
under	coverlets,	and	on	bedsteads	corded	for	bedding.
We	came	to	the	city	of	these	men	and	their	handsome	houses,	and	a	whole
month	he	entertained	me	and	asked	me	everything	15	of	Ilion,	and	the
ships	of	the	Argives,	and	the	Achaians'
homecoming,	and	I	told	him	all	the	tale	as	it	happened.
But	when	I	asked	him	about	the	way	back	and	requested
conveyance,	again	he	did	not	refuse,	but	granted	me	passage.
He	gave	me	a	bag	made	of	the	skin	taken	off	a	nine-year
20	ox,	stuffed	full	inside	with	the	courses	of	all	the	blowing	winds,	for	the	son
of	Kronos	had	set	him	in	charge	over
the	winds,	to	hold	them	still	or	start	them	up	at	his	pleasure.
He	stowed	it	away	in	the	hollow	ship,	tied	fast	with	a	silver	string,	so	there
should	be	no	wrong	breath	of	wind,	not	even
The	island	of	Aiolos	and	the	bag	of	winds
25	a	little,	but	set	the	West	Wind	free	to	blow	me	and	carry
the	ships	and	the	men	aboard	them	on	their	way;	but	it	was	not	so	to	be,	for
we	were	ruined	by	our	own	folly.
‘Nevertheless	we	sailed	on,	night	and	day,	for	nine	days,
and	on	the	tenth	at	last	appeared	the	land	of	our	fathers,
30	and	we	could	see	people	tending	fires,	we	were	very	close	to	them.
But	then	the	sweet	sleep	came	upon	me,	for	I	was	worn	out
with	always	handling	the	sheet	myself,	and	I	would	not	give	it	to	any	other
companion,	so	we	could	come	home	quicker
to	our	own	country;	but	my	companions	talked	with	each	other	35	and	said
that	I	was	bringing	silver	and	gold	home	with	me,
given	me	by	great-hearted	Aiolos,	son	of	Hippotas;
and	thus	they	would	speak	to	each	other,	each	looking	at	the	man	next	him:
“See	now,	this	man	is	loved	by	everybody	and	favored
by	all,	whenever	he	visits	anyone's	land	and	city,
40	and	is	bringing	home	with	him	handsome	treasures	taken	from	the	plunder
of	Troy,	while	we,	who	have	gone	through	everything	he	has
on	the	same	venture,	come	home	with	our	hands	empty.	Now	too	Aiolos	in
favor	of	friendship	has	given	him	all	these
goods.	Let	us	quickly	look	inside	and	see	what	is	in	there,	45	and	how
much	silver	and	gold	this	bag	contains	inside	it.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	the	evil	counsel	of	my	companions
prevailed,	and	they	opened	the	bag	and	the	winds	all	burst	out.	Suddenly
the	storm	caught	them	away	and	swept	them	over	the	water
weeping,	away	from	their	own	country.	Then	I	waking
50	pondered	deeply	in	my	own	blameless	spirit,	whether
to	throw	myself	over	the	side	and	die	in	the	open	water,
or	wait	it	out	in	silence	and	still	be	one	of	the	living;
and	I	endured	it	and	waited,	and	hiding	my	face	I	lay	down
in	the	ship,	while	all	were	carried	on	the	evil	blast	of	the	stormwind	55
back	to	the	Aiolian	island,	with	my	friends	grieving.
‘There	again	we	set	foot	on	the	mainland,	and	fetched	water,
and	my	companions	soon	took	their	supper	there	by	the	fast	ships.
But	after	we	had	tasted	of	food	and	drink,	then	I
took	along	one	herald	with	me,	and	one	companion,
60	and	went	up	to	the	famous	house	of	Aiolos.	There	I	found	him	sitting	at
dinner	with	his	wife	and	with	his	own	children.
We	came	to	the	house	beside	the	pillars,	and	on	the	doorstone
All	ships	but	one,	with	crews,
we	sat	down,	and	their	minds	wondered	at	us	and	they	asked	us:	“What
brings	you	back,	Odysseus?	What	evil	spirit	has	vexed	you?
65	We	sent	you	properly	on	your	way,	so	you	could	come	back
to	your	own	country	and	house	and	whatever	else	is	dear	to	you.”
‘So	they	spoke,	and	I	though	sorry	at	heart	answered:
“My	wretched	companions	brought	me	to	ruin,	helped	by	the	pitiless	sleep.
Then	make	it	right,	dear	friends;	for	you	have	the	power.”
70	‘So	I	spoke	to	them,	plying	them	with	words	of	endearment,	but	they	were
all	silent;	only	the	father	found	words	and	answered:	“O	least	of	living
creatures,	out	of	this	island!	Hurry!
I	have	no	right	to	see	on	his	way,	none	to	give	passage
to	any	man	whom	the	blessed	gods	hate	with	such	bitterness.
75	Out.	This	arrival	means	you	are	hateful	to	the	immortals.”
‘So	speaking	he	sent	me,	groaning	heavily,	out	of	his	palace,
and	from	there,	grieving	still	at	heart,	we	sailed	on	further,	but	the	men's
spirit	was	worn	away	with	the	pain	of	rowing
and	our	own	silliness,	since	homecoming	seemed	ours	no	longer.
80	‘Nevertheless	we	sailed	on,	night	and	day,	for	six	days,	and	on	the	seventh
came	to	the	sheer	citadel	of
Lamos
,	
Telepylos
	of	the
Laistrygones
,	where
one	herdsman,	driving	his	flocks	in	hails	another,	who	answers	as	he
drives
his	flocks	out;	and	there	a	man	who	could	do	without	sleep	could	earn	him
85	double	wages,	one	for	herding	the	cattle,	one	for	the	silvery	sheep.
There	the	courses	of	night	and	day	lie	close	together.
There	as	we	entered	the	glorious	harbor,	which	a	sky-towering	cliff
encloses	on	either	side,	with	no	break	anywhere,
and	two	projecting	promontories	facing	each	other
90	run	out	toward	the	mouth,	and	there	is	a	narrow	entrance,
there	all	the	rest	of	them	had	their	oar-swept	ships	in	the	inward	part,	they
were	tied	up	close	together	inside	the	hollow
harbor,	for	there	was	never	a	swell	of	surf	inside	it,
neither	great	nor	small,	but	there	was	a	pale	calm	on	it.
95	I	myself,	however,	kept	my	black	ship	on	the	outside,
at	the	very	end,	making	her	fast	to	the	cliff	with	a	cable,	and	climbed	to	a
rocky	point	of	observation	and	stood	there.
From	here	no	trace	of	cattle	nor	working	of	men	was	visible;	all	we	could
see	was	the	smoke	going	up	from	the	country.
100	So	I	sent	companions	ahead	telling	them	to	find	out
destroyed	by	the	Laistrygones
what	men,	eaters	of	bread,	might	live	here	in	this	country.
I	chose	two	men,	and	sent	a	third	with	them,	as	a	herald.
They	left	the	ship	and	walked	on	a	smooth	road	where	the	wagons	carried
the	timber	down	from	the	high	hills	to	the	city,
105	and	there	in	front	of	the	town	they	met	a	girl	drawing	water.
This	was	the	powerful	daughter	of	the	Laistrygonian
Antiphates,	who	had	gone	down	to	the	sweet-running	wellspring,	
Artakie
,
whence	they	would	carry	their	water	back	to	the	city.
My	men	stood	by	her	and	talked	with	her,	and	asked	her	who	was	110	king
of	these	people	and	who	was	lord	over	them.	She	readily	pointed	out	to
them	the	high-roofed	house	of	her	father.
But	when	they	entered	the	glorious	house,	they	found	there	a	woman	as	big
as	a	mountain	peak,	and	the	sight	of	her	filled	them	with	horror.
At	once	she	summoned	famous	Antiphates,	her	husband,
115	from	their	assembly,	and	he	devised	dismal	death	against	them.
He	snatched	up	one	of	my	companions,	and	prepared	him	for	dinner,	but
the	other	two	darted	away	in	flight,	and	got	back	to	my	ship.
The	king	raised	the	cry	through	the	city.	Hearing	him	the	powerful
Laistrygones	came	swarming	up	from	every	direction,
120	tens	of	thousands	of	them,	and	not	like	men,	like	giants.
These,	standing	along	the	cliffs,	pelted	my	men	with	man-sized	boulders,
and	a	horrid	racket	went	up	by	the	ships,	of	men
being	killed	and	ships	being	smashed	to	pieces.	They	speared	them	like
fish,	and	carried	them	away	for	their	joyless	feasting.
125	But	while	they	were	destroying	them	in	the	deep-water	harbor,	meanwhile
I,	drawing	from	beside	my	thigh	the	sharp	sword,
chopped	away	the	cable	that	tied	the	ship	with	the	dark	prow,	and	called
out	to	my	companions,	and	urged	them	with	all	speed	to	throw	their	weight
on	the	oars	and	escape	the	threatening	evil,	130	and	they	made	the	water
fly,	fearing	destruction.	Gladly
my	ship,	and	only	mine,	fled	out	from	the	overhanging
cliffs	to	the	open	water,	but	the	others	were	all	destroyed	there.
‘From	there	we	sailed	on	further	along,	glad	to	have	escaped	death,	but
grieving	still	at	heart	for	the	loss	of	our	dear	companions.
135	We	came	to
Aiaia
,	which	is	an	island.	There	lived	Circe	of	the	lovely	hair,
the	dread	goddess	who	talks	with	mortals,	who	is	own	sister	to	the
malignant-minded	Aietes;
for	they	both	are	children	of	Helios,	who	shines	on	mortals,	and	their
mother	is
Perse
	who	in	turn	is	daughter	of	Ocean.
Exploration	of	Circe's	island
140	There	we	brought	our	ship	in	to	the	shore,	in	silence,
at	a	harbor	fit	for	ships	to	lie,	and	some	god	guided	us
in.	There	we	disembarked,	and	for	two	days	and	two	nights
we	lay	there,	for	sorrow	and	weariness	eating	our	hearts	out.
But	when	the	fair-haired	Dawn	in	her	rounds	brought	on	the	third	day,	145
then	at	last	I	took	up	my	spear	again,	my	sharp	sword,
and	went	up	quickly	from	beside	the	ship	to	find	a	lookout
place,	to	look	for	some	trace	of	people,	listen	for	some	sound.
I	climbed	to	a	rocky	point	of	observation	and	stood	there,
and	got	a	sight	of	smoke	which	came	from	the	halls	of	Circe	150	going	up
from	wide-wayed	earth	through	undergrowth	and	forest.
Then	I	pondered	deeply	in	my	heart	and	my	spirit,
whether,	since	I	had	seen	the	fire	and	smoke,	to	investigate;	but	in	the
division	of	my	heart	this	way	seemed	the	best	to	me,	to	go	back	first	to	the
fast	ship	and	the	beach	of	the	sea,	and	give	155	my	companions	some
dinner,	then	send	them	forward	to	investigate.
But	on	my	way,	as	I	was	close	to	the	oar-swept	vessel,
some	god,	because	I	was	all	alone,	took	pity	upon	me,
and	sent	a	great	stag	with	towering	antlers	right	in	my	very	path;	he	had
come	from	his	range	in	the	forest	down	to	the	river	160	to	drink,	for	the
fierce	strength	of	the	sun	was	upon	him.	As	he	stepped	out,	I	hit	him	in	the
middle	of	the	back,	next	to
the	spine,	so	that	the	brazen	spearhead	smashed	its	way	clean	through.
He	screamed	and	dropped	in	the	dust	and	the	life	spirit	fluttered	from	him.
I	set	my	foot	on	him	and	drew	the	bronze	spear	out	of
the	wound	it	had	made,	and	rested	it	on	the	ground,	while	I	pulled	growing
twigs	and	willow	withes	and,	braiding	them	into	a	rope,	about	six	feet	in
length,	and	looping	them	over
the	feet	of	this	great	monster	on	both	sides,	lashed	them	together,	and	with
him	loaded	over	my	neck	went	toward	the	black	ship,	170	propping	myself
on	my	spear,	for	there	was	no	way	to	carry	him	on	the	shoulder	holding
him	with	one	hand,	he	was	such	a	very	big	beast.	I	threw	him	down	by	the
ship	and	roused	my	companions,	standing	beside	each	man	and	speaking	to
him	in	kind	words:	“Dear	friends,	sorry	as	we	are,	we	shall	not	yet	go
down	into	175	the	house	of	Hades.	Not	until	our	day	is	appointed.
Come	then,	while	there	is	something	to	eat	and	drink	by	the	fast	ship,	let	us
think	of	our	food	and	not	be	worn	out	with	hunger.”
Her	enchanted	beasts
‘So	I	spoke,	and	they	listened	at	once	to	me	and	obeyed	me,
and	unveiling	their	heads	along	the	beach	of	the	barren	water	180	they
admired	the	stag,	and	truly	he	was	a	very	big	beast.
But	after	they	had	looked	at	him	and	their	eyes	had	enjoyed	him,	they
washed	their	hands	and	set	to	preparing	a	communal	high	feast.
So	for	the	whole	length	of	the	day	until	the	sun's	setting
we	sat	there	feasting	on	unlimited	meat	and	sweet	wine.
185	But	when	the	sun	went	down	and	the	sacred	darkness	came	over,	then	we
lay	down	to	sleep	along	the	break	of	the	seashore;
but	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,	then	I	held
an	assembly	and	spoke	forth	to	all	of	them:
“Hear	my	words,	my	companions,	in	spite	of	your	hearts'	sufferings.
190	Dear	friends,	for	we	do	not	know	where	the	darkness	is	nor	the	sunrise,
nor	where	the	Sun	who	shines	upon	people	rises,	nor	where
he	sets,	then	let	us	hasten	our	minds	and	think,	whether	there	is	any	course
left	open	to	us.	But	I	think	there	is	none.
For	I	climbed	to	a	rocky	place	of	observation	and	looked	at	195	the	island,
and	the	endless	sea	lies	all	in	a	circle
around	it,	but	the	island	itself	lies	low,	and	my	eyes	saw
smoke	rising	in	the	middle	through	the	undergrowth	and	the	forest.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	the	inward	heart	in	them	was	broken,
as	they	remembered	Antiphates	the	Laistrygonian
200	and	the	violence	of	the	great-hearted	cannibal	Cyclops,
and	they	wept	loud	and	shrill,	letting	the	big	tears	fall,
but	there	came	no	advantage	to	them	for	all	their	sorrowing.
‘I	counted	off	all	my	strong-greaved	companions	into	two
divisions,	and	appointed	a	leader	for	each,	I	myself
205	taking	one,	while	godlike
Eurylochos
	had	the	other.
Promptly	then	we	shook	the	lots	in	a	brazen	helmet,
and	the	lot	of	great-hearted	Eurylochos	sprang	out.	He	then	went	on	his
way,	and	with	him	two-and-twenty	companions,
weeping,	and	we	whom	they	left	behind	were	mourning	also.
210	In	the	forest	glen	they	came	on	the	house	of	Circe.	It	was	in	an	open
place,	and	put	together	from	stones,	well	polished,	and	all	about	it	there
were	lions,	and	wolves	of	the	mountains,	whom	the	goddess	had	given
evil	drugs	and	enchanted,
and	these	made	no	attack	on	the	men,	but	came	up	thronging
215	about	them,	waving	their	long	tails	and	fawning,	in	the	way	that	dogs	go
fawning	about	their	master,	when	he	comes	home
Half	the	men	changed	to	swine
from	dining	out,	for	he	always	brings	back	something	to	please	them;	so
these	wolves	with	great	strong	claws	and	lions	came	fawning	on	my	men,
but	they	were	afraid	when	they	saw	the	terrible	big	beasts.
220	They	stood	there	in	the	forecourt	of	the	goddess	with	the	glorious	hair,
and	heard	Circe	inside	singing	in	a	sweet	voice
as	she	went	up	and	down	a	great	design	on	a	loom,	immortal
such	as	goddesses	have,	delicate	and	lovely	and	glorious
their	work.	Now
Polites
	leader	of	men,	who	was	225	the	best	and	dearest	to
me	of	my	friends,	began	the	discussion:	“Friends,	someone	inside	going	up
and	down	a	great	piece
of	weaving	is	singing	sweetly,	and	the	whole	place	murmurs	to	the	echo	of
it,	whether	she	is	woman	or	goddess.	Come,	let	us	call	her.”
‘So	he	spoke	to	them,	and	the	rest	gave	voice,	and	called	her,
230	and	at	once	she	opened	the	shining	doors,	and	came	out,	and	invited	them
in,	and	all	in	their	innocence	entered;	only
Eurylochos	waited	outside,	for	he	suspected	treachery.
She	brought	them	inside	and	seated	them	on	chairs	and	benches,	and	mixed
them	a	potion,	with	barley	and	cheese	and	pale	honey	235	added
to
Pramneian	wine
,	but	put	into	the	mixture	malignant	drugs,	to	make	them
forgetful	of	their	own	country.
When	she	had	given	them	this	and	they	had	drunk	it	down,	next	thing	she
struck	them	with	her	wand	and	drove	them	into	her	pig	pens,	and	they	took
on	the	look	of	pigs,	with	the	heads	and	voices	240	and	bristles	of	pigs,	but
the	minds	within	them	stayed	as	they	had	been	before.	So	crying	they	went
in,	and	before	them	Circe
threw	down	acorns	for	them	to	eat,	and	ilex	and	cornel
buds,	such	food	as	pigs	who	sleep	on	the	ground	always	feed	on.
‘Eurylochos	came	back	again	to	the	fast	black	ship,
245	to	tell	the	story	of	our	companions	and	of	their	dismal
fate,	but	he	could	not	get	a	word	out,	though	he	was	trying	to	speak,	but	his
heart	was	stunned	by	the	great	sorrow,	and	both	eyes	filled	with	tears,	he
could	think	of	nothing	but	lamentation.
But	after	we	had	wondered	at	him	and	asked	him	questions,
250	at	last	he	told	us	about	the	loss	of	his	other	companions:	“We	went,	O
glorious	Odysseus,	through	the	growth	as	you
told	us,	and	found	a	fine	house	in	the	glen.	It	was
in	an	open	place,	and	put	together	from	stones,	well	polished.
Someone,	goddess	or	woman,	was	singing	inside	in	a	clear	voice	255	as
she	went	up	and	down	her	loom,	and	they	called	her,	and	spoke	to	her,
Odysseus	encounters	Hermes
and	at	once	she	opened	the	shining	doors,	and	came	out	and	invited	them
in,	and	all	in	their	innocence	entered,	only
I	waited	for	them	outside,	for	I	suspected	treachery.
Then	the	whole	lot	of	them	vanished	away	together,	nor	did	one	260	single
one	come	out,	though	I	sat	and	watched	for	a	long	time.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	I	slung	my	great	bronze	sword	with	the	silver
nails	across	my	shoulders,	and	hung	my	bow	on	also,
and	told	him	to	guide	me	back	by	the	same	way	he	had	gone;
but	he,	clasping	my	knees	in	both	hands,	entreated	me,
265	and	in	loud	lamentation	spoke	to	me	and	addressed	me:
“Illustrious,	do	not	take	me	against	my	will	there.	Leave	me	here,	for	I
know	you	will	never	come	back	yourself,	nor	bring	back	any	of	your
companions.	Let	us	rather	make	haste,	and	with	these	who	are	left,	escape,
for	we	still	may	avoid	the	day	of	evil.”
270	‘So	he	spoke,	and	I	answered	again	in	turn	and	said	to	him:	“Eurylochos,
you	may	stay	here	eating	and	drinking,	even	where	you	are	and	beside	the
hollow	black	ship;	only
I	shall	go.	For	there	is	strong	compulsion	upon	me.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	started	up	from	the	ship	and	the	seashore.
275	But	as	I	went	up	through	the	lonely	glens,	and	was	coming
near	to	the	great	house	of	Circe,	skilled	in	medicines,
there	as	I	came	up	to	the	house,	Hermes,	of	the	golden
staff,	met	me	on	my	way,	in	the	likeness	of	a	young	man
with	beard	new	grown,	which	is	the	most	graceful	time	of	young	manhood.
280	He	took	me	by	the	hand	and	spoke	to	me	and	named	me,	saying:	“Where
are	you	going,	unhappy	man,	all	alone,	through	the	hilltops,	ignorant	of
the	land-lay,	and	your	friends	are	here	in	Circe's	place,	in	the	shape	of	pigs
and	holed	up	in	the	close	pig	pens.
Do	you	come	here	meaning	to	set	them	free?	I	do	not	think
285	you	will	get	back	yourself,	but	must	stay	here	with	the	others.
But	see,	I	will	find	you	a	way	out	of	your	troubles,	and	save	you.
Here,	this	is	a	good	medicine,	take	it,	and	go	into	Circe's	house;	it	will	give
you	power	against	the	day	of	trouble.
And	I	will	tell	you	all	the	malevolent	guiles	of	Circe.
290	She	will	make	you	a	potion,	and	put	drugs	in	the	food,	but	she	will	not
even	so	be	able	to	enchant	you,	for	this	good	medicine
which	I	give	you	now	will	prevent	her.	I	will	tell	you	the	details	of	what	to
do.	As	soon	as	Circe	with	her	long	wand	strikes	you,
The	herb	moly	saves	Odysseus
then	drawing	from	beside	your	thigh	your	sharp	sword,	rush
295	forward	against	Circe,	as	if	you	were	raging	to	kill	her,
and	she	will	be	afraid,	and	invite	you	to	go	to	bed	with	her.
Do	not	then	resist	and	refuse	the	bed	of	the	goddess,
for	so	she	will	set	free	your	companions,	and	care	for	you	also;	but	bid	her
swear	the	great	oath	of	the	blessed	gods,	that	she	300	has	no	other	evil	hurt
that	she	is	devising	against	you,
so	she	will	not	make	you	weak	and	unmanned,	once	you	are	naked.”
‘So	spoke	Argeïphontes,	and	he	gave	me	the	medicine,
which	he	picked	out	of	the	ground,	and	he	explained	the	nature	of	it	to	me.
It	was	black	at	the	root,	but	with	a	milky
305	flower.	The	gods	call	it	moly.	It	is	hard	for	mortal
men	to	dig	up,	but	the	gods	have	power	to	do	all	things.
‘Then	Hermes	went	away,	passing	over	the	wooded	island,
toward	tall	Olympos,	and	I	meanwhile	made	my	way	to	the	house	of	Circe,
but	my	heart	was	a	storm	in	me	as	I	went.	Now
310	I	stood	outside	at	the	doors	of	the	goddess	with	the	glorious	hair,	and
standing	I	shouted	aloud;	and	the	goddess	heard	me,	and	at	once	she
opened	the	shining	doors	and	came	out	and	invited	me	in;	and	I,	deeply
troubled	in	my	heart,	went	in	with	her.
She	made	me	sit	down	in	a	chair	that	was	wrought	elaborately	315	and
splendid	with	silver	nails,	and	under	my	feet	was	a	footstool.
She	made	a	potion	for	me	to	drink	and	gave	it	in	a	golden
cup,	and	with	evil	thoughts	in	her	heart	added	the	drug	to	it.
Then	when	she	had	given	it	and	I	drank	it	off,	without	being	enchanted,	she
struck	me	with	her	wand	and	spoke	and	named	me:	320	“Go	to	your	sty
now	and	lie	down	with	your	other	friends	there.”
‘So	she	spoke,	but	I,	drawing	from	beside	my	thigh	the	sharp	sword,
rushed	forward	against	Circe	as	if	I	were	raging	to	kill	her,	but	she
screamed	aloud	and	ran	under	my	guard,	and	clasping	both	knees	in	loud
lamentation	spoke	to	me	and	addressed	me	in	winged	words:	325	“What
man	are	you	and	whence?	Where	are	your	city	and	parents?
The	wonder	is	on	me	that	you	drank	my	drugs	and	have	not	been
enchanted,	for	no	other	man	beside	could	have	stood	up
under	my	drugs,	once	he	drank	and	they	passed	the	barrier
of	his	teeth.	There	is	a	mind	in	you	no	magic	will	work	on.
330	You	are	then	resourceful	Odysseus.	Argeïphontes
of	the	golden	staff	was	forever	telling	me	you	would	come
to	me,	on	your	way	back	from	Troy	with	your	fast	black	ship.
from	Circe's	spells
Come	then,	put	away	your	sword	in	its	sheath,	and	let	us
two	go	up	into	my	bed	so	that,	lying	together
335	in	the	bed	of	love,	we	may	then	have	faith	and	trust	in	each	other.”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	I	answered	her	again	and	said	to	her:
“Circe,	how	can	you	ask	me	to	be	gentle	with	you,	when	it
is	you	who	turned	my	companions	into	pigs	in	your	palace?
And	now	you	have	me	here	myself,	you	treacherously
340	ask	me	to	go	into	your	chamber,	and	go	to	bed	with	you,
so	that	when	I	am	naked	you	can	make	me	a	weakling,	unmanned.
I	would	not	be	willing	to	go	to	bed	with	you	unless
you	can	bring	yourself,	O	goddess,	to	swear	me	a	great	oath	that	there	is	no
other	evil	hurt	you	devise	against	me.”
345	‘So	I	spoke,	and	she	at	once	swore	me	the	oath,	as	I	asked	her,	But	after
she	had	sworn	me	the	oath,	and	made	an	end	of	it,	I	mounted	the
surpassingly	beautiful	bed	of	Circe.
‘Meanwhile,	the	four	maidservants,	who	wait	on	Circe
in	her	house,	were	busy	at	their	work,	all	through	the	palace.
350	These	are	daughters	born	of	the	springs	and	from	the	coppices	and	the
sacred	rivers	which	flow	down	to	the	sea.	Of	these
one	laid	the	coverlets,	splendid	and	stained	in	purple,	over	the	backs	of	the
chairs,	and	spread	on	the	seats	the	cloths	to	sit	on.
The	second	drew	up	the	silver	tables	and	placed	them	in	front	of	355	the
chairs,	and	laid	out	the	golden	serving	baskets	upon	them.
The	third	mixed	wine,	kindly	sweet	and	fragrant,	in	the	silver	mixing	bowl,
and	set	out	the	golden	goblets.	The	fourth	one	brought	in	water,	then	set
about	building	up	an	abundant
fire,	underneath	the	great	caldron,	and	the	water	heated.
360	But	when	the	water	had	come	to	a	boil	in	the	shining	bronze,	then	she	sat
me	down	in	the	bathtub	and	washed	me	from	the	great	caldron,	mixing	hot
and	cold	just	as	I	wanted,	and	pouring	it
over	shoulders	and	head,	to	take	the	heart-wasting	weariness	from	my
limbs.	When	she	had	bathed	me	and	anointed	me	with	olive	oil,	365	she
put	a	splendid	mantle	and	a	tunic	upon	me,
and	made	me	sit	down	in	a	chair	that	was	wrought	elaborately	and	splendid
with	silver	nails,	and	under	my	feet	was	a	footstool.
A	maidservant	brought	water	for	us	and	poured	it	from	a	splendid	and
golden	pitcher,	holding	it	above	a	silver	basin,
370	for	us	to	wash,	and	she	pulled	a	polished	table	before	us.
The	swine	changed	back	to	men
A	grave	housekeeper	brought	in	the	bread	and	served	it	to	us,	adding	many
good	things	to	it,	generous	with	her	provisions,	and	told	us	to	eat,	but
nothing	pleased	my	mind,	and	I	sat	there	thinking	of	something	else,	mind
full	of	evil	imaginings.
375	‘When	Circe	noticed	how	I	sat	there	without	ever	putting	my	hands	out	to
the	food,	and	with	the	strong	sorrow	upon	me,	she	came	close,	and	stood
beside	me	and	addressed	me	in	winged	words:	“Why,	Odysseus,	do	you
sit	so,	like	a	man	who	has	lost	his
voice,	eating	your	heart	out,	but	touch	neither	food	nor	drink.	Is	it	380	that
you	suspect	me	of	more	treachery?	But	you	have	nothing	to	fear,	since	I
have	already	sworn	my	strong	oath	to	you.”
‘So	she	spoke,	but	I	answered	her	again	and	said	to	her:
“Oh,	Circe,	how	could	any	man	right	in	his	mind	ever
endure	to	taste	of	the	food	and	drink	that	are	set	before	him,	385	until	with
his	eyes	he	saw	his	companions	set	free?	So	then,	if	you	are	sincerely
telling	me	to	eat	and	drink,	set	them
free,	so	my	eyes	can	again	behold	my	eager	companions.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	Circe	walked	on	out	through	the	palace,
holding	her	wand	in	her	hand,	and	opened	the	doors	of	the	pigsty,	390	and
drove	them	out.	They	looked	like	nine-year-old	porkers.	They	stood	ranged
and	facing	her,	and	she,	making	her	way	through	their	ranks,	anointed	each
of	them	with	some	other	medicine,
and	the	bristles,	grown	upon	them	by	the	evil	medicine	Circe	had	bestowed
upon	them	before,	now	fell	away	from	them,
395	and	they	turned	back	once	more	into	men,	younger	than	they	had	been
and	taller	for	the	eye	to	behold	and	handsomer	by	far.
They	recognized	me,	and	each	of	them	clung	to	my	hand.	The	lovely
longing	for	lamentation	came	over	us,	and	the	house	echoed
terribly	to	the	sound,	and	even	the	goddess	took	pity,
400	and	she,	shining	among	goddesses,	came	close	and	said	to	me:	“Son	of
Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
go	back	down	now	to	your	fast	ship	and	the	sand	of	the	seashore,	and	first
of	all,	drag	your	ship	up	on	the	land,	stowing
your	possessions	and	all	the	ship's	running	gear	away	in	the	sea	caves,	405
and	then	come	back,	and	bring	with	you	your	eager	companions.”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	the	proud	heart	in	me	was	persuaded,
and	I	went	back	down	to	my	fast	ship	and	the	sand	of	the	seashore,	and
there	I	found	beside	the	fast	ship	my	eager	companions
pitiful	in	their	lamentation	and	weeping	big	tears.
Reunion	of	all	the	crew
410	And	as,	in	the	country,	the	calves,	around	the	cows	returning	from	pasture
back	to	the	dung	of	the	farmyard,	well	filled	with	grazing,	come
gamboling	together	to	meet	them,	and	the	pens	no	longer	can	hold	them
in,	but	lowing	incessantly	they	come	running
around	their	mothers,	so	these	men,	once	their	eyes	saw	me,	415	came
streaming	around	me,	in	tears,	and	the	spirit	in	them	made	them	feel	as	if
they	were	back	in	their	own	country,	the	very
city	of	rugged	Ithaka,	where	they	were	born	and	raised	up.
So	they	came	in	tears	about	me,	and	cried	in	winged	words:
“O	great	Odysseus,	we	are	as	happy	to	see	you	returning
420	as	if	we	had	come	back	to	our	own	Ithakan	country.
But	come,	tell	us	about	the	death	of	our	other	companions.”
‘So	they	spoke,	but	I	answered	in	soft	words	and	told	them:
“First	of	all,	let	us	drag	our	ship	up	on	the	land,	stowing	our	possessions
and	all	the	ship's	running	gear	away	in	the	sea	caves,	425	and	then	make
haste,	all	of	you,	to	come	along	with	me,
so	that	you	can	see	your	companions,	in	the	sacred	dwelling	of	Circe,
eating	and	drinking,	for	they	have	all	in	abundance.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	at	once	they	did	as	I	told	them.	Only
Eurylochos	was	trying	to	hold	back	all	my	other
430	companions,	and	he	spoke	to	them	and	addressed	them	in	winged	words:
“Ah,	poor	wretches.	Where	are	we	going?	Why	do	you	long	for	the	evils
of	going	down	into	Circe's	palace,	for	she	will
transform	the	lot	of	us	into	pigs	or	wolves	or	lions,
and	so	we	shall	guard	her	great	house	for	her,	under	compulsion.
435	So	too	it	happened	with	the	Cyclops,	when	our	companions
went	into	his	yard,	and	the	bold	Odysseus	was	of	their	company;	for	it	was
by	this	man's	recklessness	that	these	too	perished.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	I	considered	in	my	mind	whether
to	draw	out	the	long-edged	sword	from	beside	my	big	thigh,
440	and	cut	off	his	head	and	throw	it	on	the	ground,	even	though	he	was
nearly	related	to	me	by	marriage;	but	my	companions
checked	me,	first	one	then	another	speaking,	trying	to	soothe	me:	“Zeus-
sprung	Odysseus,	if	you	ask	us	to,	we	will	leave
this	man	here	to	stay	where	he	is	and	keep	watch	over
445	the	ship.	You	show	us	the	way	to	the	sacred	dwelling	of	Circe.”
‘So	they	spoke,	and	started	up	from	the	ship	and	the	seashore;
nor	would	Eurylochos	be	left	alone	by	the	hollow
ship,	but	followed	along	in	fear	of	my	fierce	reproaches.
Life	with	Circe
‘Meanwhile,	inside	the	house,	Circe	with	loving	care	bathed
450	the	rest	of	my	companions,	and	anointed	them	well	with	olive	oil,	and	put
about	them	mantles	of	fleece	and	tunics.	We	found	them	all	together,
feasting	well	in	the	halls.	When	my	men
looked	each	other	in	the	face	and	knew	one	another,
they	burst	into	an	outcry	of	tears,	and	the	whole	house	echoed,	455	But
she,	shining	among	goddesses,	came	close	and	said	to	us:	“Son	of	Laertes
and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
no	longer	raise	the	swell	of	your	lamentation.	I	too
know	all	the	pains	you	have	suffered	on	the	sea	where	the	fish	swarm,	and
all	the	damage	done	you	on	the	dry	land	by	hostile
460	men.	But	come	now,	eat	your	food	and	drink	your	wine,	until	you	gather
back	again	into	your	chests	that	kind	of	spirit
you	had	in	you	when	first	you	left	the	land	of	your	fathers	on	rugged
Ithaka.	Now	you	are	all	dried	out,	dispirited
from	the	constant	thought	of	your	hard	wandering,	nor	is	there	any	465
spirit	in	your	festivity,	because	of	so	much	suffering.”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	the	proud	heart	in	us	was	persuaded.
There	for	all	our	days	until	a	year	was	completed
we	sat	there	feasting	on	unlimited	meat	and	sweet	wine.
But	when	it	was	the	end	of	a	year,	and	the	months	wasted
470	away,	and	the	seasons	changed,	and	the	long	days	were	accomplished,
then	my	eager	companions	called	me	aside	and	said	to	me:
“What	ails	you	now?	It	is	time	to	think	about	our	own	country,	if	truly	it	is
ordained	that	you	shall	survive	and	come	back	to	your	strong-founded
house	and	to	the	land	of	your	fathers.”
475	‘So	they	spoke,	and	the	proud	heart	in	me	was	persuaded.	So	for	the
whole	length	of	the	day	until	the	sun's	setting	we	sat	there	feasting	on
unlimited	meat	and	sweet	wine.
But	when	the	sun	went	down	and	the	sacred	darkness	came	over,	they	lay
down	to	sleep	all	about	the	shadowy	chambers,
480	but	I,	mounting	the	surpassingly	beautiful	bed	of	Circe,
clasped	her	by	the	knees	and	entreated	her,	and	the	goddess	listened	to	me,
and	I	spoke	to	her	and	addressed	her	in	winged	words:	“O	Circe,
accomplish	now	the	promise	you	gave,	that	you
would	see	me	on	my	way	home.	The	spirit	within	me	is	urgent	485	now,	as
also	in	the	rest	of	my	friends,	who	are	wasting
my	heart	away,	lamenting	around	me,	when	you	are	elsewhere.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	she,	shining	among	goddesses,	answered:
Odysseus	before	going	home	must	visit	the	land	of	the	dead
“Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
you	shall	no	longer	stay	in	my	house	when	none	of	you	wish	to;	490	but
first	there	is	another	journey	you	must	accomplish
and	reach	the	house	of	Hades	and	of	revered
Persephone
,	there	to	consult
with	the	soul	of
Teiresias
	the	Theban,	the	blind	prophet,	whose	senses	stay
unshaken	within	him,
to	whom	alone	Persephone	has	granted	intelligence
495	even	after	death,	but	the	rest	of	them	are	flittering	shadows.”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	the	inward	heart	in	me	was	broken,
and	I	sat	down	on	the	bed	and	cried,	nor	did	the	heart	in	me	wish	to	go	on
living	any	longer,	nor	to	look	on	the	sunlight.
But	when	I	had	glutted	myself	with	rolling	about	and	weeping,	500	then	at
last	I	spoke	aloud	and	answered	the	goddess:
“Circe,	who	will	be	our	guide	on	that	journey?	No	one
has	ever	yet	in	a	black	ship	gone	all	the	way	to	Hades’.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	she,	shining	among	goddesses,	answered:
“Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
505	let	no	need	for	a	guide	on	your	ship	trouble	you;	only
set	up	your	mast	pole	and	spread	the	white	sails	upon	it,
and	sit	still,	and	let	the	blast	of	the	North	Wind	carry	you.
But	when	you	have	crossed	with	your	ship	the	stream	of	the	Ocean,	you
will	find	there	a	thickly	wooded	shore,	and	the	groves	of	Persephone,	510
and	tall	black	poplars	growing,	and	fruit-perishing	willows;	then	beach
your	ship	on	the	shore	of	the	deep-eddying	Ocean	and	yourself	go	forward
into	the	moldering	home	of	Hades.
There
Pyriphlegethon
	and
Kokytos
,	which	is	an	off-break	from	the	water	of
the	Styx,	flow	into
Acheron
.	There	is	515	a	rock	there,	and	the	junction	of
two	thunderous	rivers.
There,	hero,	you	must	go	close	in	and	do	as	I	tell	you.
Dig	a	pit	of	about	a	cubit	in	each	direction,
and	pour	it	full	of	drink	offerings	for	all	the	dead,	first	honey	mixed	with
mlk,	then	a	second	pouring	of	sweet	wine,
520	and	the	third,	water,	and	over	all	then	sprinkle	white	barley,	and	promise
many	times	to	the	strengthless	heads	of	the	perished	dead	that,	returning	to
Ithaka,	you	will	slaughter	a	barren	cow,	your	best,	in	your	palace	and	pile
the	pyre	with	treasures,	and	to	Teiresias	apart	dedicate	an	all-back
525	ram,	the	one	conspicuous	in	all	your	sheepflocks.
Sailing	instructions—the	men	are	told
But	when	with	prayers	you	have	entreated	the	glorious	hordes	of	the	dead,
then	sacrifice	one	ram	and	one	black	female,
turning	them	toward
Erebos
,	but	yourself	turn	away	from	them	and	make
for	where	the	river	runs,	and	there	the	numerous
530	souls	of	the	perished	dead	will	come	and	gather	about	you.
Then	encourage	your	companions	and	tell	them,	taking
the	sheep	that	are	lying	by,	slaughtered	with	the	pitiless
bronze,	to	skin	these,	and	burn	them,	and	pray	to	the	divinities,	to	Hades
the	powerful,	and	to	revered	Persephone,
535	while	you	yourself,	drawing	from	beside	your	thigh	the	sharp	sword,
crouch	there,	and	do	not	let	the	strengthless	heads	of	the	perished	dead
draw	nearer	to	the	blood	until	you	have	questioned	Teiresias.
Then,	leader	of	the	host,	the	prophet	will	soon	come	to	you,	and	he	will	tell
you	the	way	to	go,	the	stages	of	your	journey,	540	and	tell	you	how	to
make	your	way	home	on	the	sea	where	the	fish	swarm.”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	Dawn	of	the	golden	throne	came	on	us,
and	she	put	clothing	upon	me,	an	outer	cloak	and	a	tunic,
while	she,	the	nymph,	mantled	herself	in	a	gleaming	white	robe	fine-
woven	and	delightful,	and	around	her	waist	she	fastened	545	a	handsome
belt	of	gold,	and	on	her	head	was	a	wimple;
while	I	walked	all	about	the	house	and	roused	my	companions,	standing
beside	each	man	and	speaking	to	him	in	kind	words:	“No	longer	lie	abed
and	dreaming	away	in	sweet	sleep.
The	queenly	Circe	has	shown	me	the	way.	So	let	us	go	now.”
550	‘So	I	spoke,	and	the	proud	heart	in	them	was	persuaded.	Yet	I	did	not	lead
away	my	companions	without	some	loss.	There	was	one,
Elpenor
,	the
youngest	man,	not	terribly	powerful	in	fighting	nor	sound	in	his	thoughts.
This	man,
apart	from	the	rest	of	his	friends,	in	search	of	cool	air,	had	lain	555	down
drunkenly	to	sleep	on	the	roof	of	Circe's	palace,
and	when	his	companions	stirred	to	go	he,	hearing	their	tumult	and	noise	of
talking,	started	suddenly	up,	and	never	thought,	when	he	went	down,	to	go
by	way	of	the	long	ladder,
but	blundered	straight	off	the	edge	of	the	roof,	so	that	his	neck	bone	560
was	broken	out	of	its	sockets,	and	his	soul	went	down	to	Hades’.
‘Now	as	my	men	were	on	their	way	I	said	a	word	to	them:
“You	think	you	are	on	your	way	back	now	to	your	own	beloved	country,
but	Circe	has	indicated	another	journey
Death	of	Elpenor
for	us,	to	the	house	of	Hades	and	of	revered	Persephone
565	there	to	consult	with	the	soul	of	Teiresias	the	Theban.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	the	inward	heart	in	them	was	broken.
They	sat	down	on	the	ground	and	lamented	and	tore	their	hair	out,	but
there	came	no	advantage	to	them	for	all	their	sorrowing.
‘When	we	came	down	to	our	fast	ship	and	the	sand	of	the	seashore,
570	we	sat	down,	sorrowful,	and	weeping	big	tears.	Circe
meanwhile	had	gone	down	herself	to	the	side	of	the	black	ship,	and
tethered	aboard	it	a	ram	and	one	black	female,	easily
passing	by	us	unseen.	Whose	eyes	can	follow	the	movement
of	a	god	passing	from	place	to	place,	unless	the	god	wishes?
BOOK	XI
‘Now	when	we	had	gone	down	again	to	the	sea	and	our	vessel,
first	of	all	we	dragged	the	ship	down	into	the	bright	water,
and	in	the	black	hull	set	the	mast	in	place,	and	set	sails,
and	took	the	sheep	and	walked	them	aboard,	and	ourselves	also	5
embarked,	but	sorrowful,	and	weeping	big	tears.	Circe
of	the	lovely	hair,	the	dread	goddess	who	talks	with	mortals,	sent	us	an
excellent	companion,	a	following	wind,	filling
the	sails,	to	carry	from	astern	the	ship	with	the	dark	prow.
We	ourselves,	over	all	the	ship	making	fast	the	running	gear,	10	sat	still,
and	let	the	wind	and	the	steersman	hold	her	steady.
All	day	long	her	sails	were	filled	as	she	went	through	the	water,	and	the
sun	set,	and	all	the	journeying-ways	were	darkened.
‘She	made	the	limit,	which	is	of	the	deep-running	Ocean.
There	lie	the	community	and	city	of	
Kimmerian
	people,	15	hidden	in	fog
and	cloud,	nor	does	Helios,	the	radiant
sun,	ever	break	through	the	dark,	to	illuminate	them	with	his	shining,
neither	when	he	climbs	up	into	the	starry	heaven,
nor	when	he	wheels	to	return	again	from	heaven	to	earth,
but	always	a	glum	night	is	spread	over	wretched	mortals.
20	Making	this	point,	we	ran	the	ship	ashore,	and	took	out
the	sheep,	and	ourselves	walked	along	by	the	stream	of	the	Ocean	until	we
came	to	that	place	to	which	Circe	had	spoken.
‘There	
Perimedes
	and	Eurylochos	held	the	victims	fast,	and	I,	drawing
from	beside	my	thigh	my	sharp	sword,
The	land	of	the	dead—the	ghost	of	Elpenor
25	dug	a	pit,	of	about	a	cubit	in	each	direction,
and	poured	it	full	of	drink	offerings	for	all	the	dead,	first	honey	mixed	with
milk,	and	the	second	pouring	was	sweet	wine,	and	the	third,	water,	and
over	it	all	I	sprinkled	white	barley.
I	promised	many	times	to	the	strengthless	heads	of	the	perished	30	dead
that,	returning	to	Ithaka,	I	would	slaughter	a	barren
cow,	my	best,	in	my	palace,	and	pile	the	pyre	with	treasures,	and	to
Teiresias	apart	would	dedicate	an	all-black
ram,	the	one	conspicuous	in	all	our	sheep	flocks.
Now	when,	with	sacrifices	and	prayers,	I	had	so	entreated
35	the	hordes	of	the	dead,	I	took	the	sheep	and	cut	their	throats	over	the	pit,
and	the	dark-clouding	blood	ran	in,	and	the	souls	of	the	perished	dead
gathered	to	the	place,	up	out	of	Erebos,	brides,	and	young	unmarried	men,
and	long-suffering	elders,
virgins,	tender	and	with	the	sorrows	of	young	hearts	upon	them,	40	and
many	fighting	men	killed	in	battle,	stabbed	with	brazen
spears,	still	carrying	their	bloody	armor	upon	them.
These	came	swarming	around	my	pit	from	every	direction
with	inhuman	clamor,	and	green	fear	took	hold	of	me.
Then	I	encouraged	my	companions	and	told	them,	taking
45	the	sheep	that	were	lying	by,	slaughtered	with	the	pitiless
bronze,	to	skin	these,	and	burn	them,	and	pray	to	the	divinities,	to	Hades
the	powerful,	and	to	revered	Persephone,
while	I	myself,	drawing	from	beside	my	thigh	my	sharp	sword,
crouched	there,	and	would	not	let	the	strengthless	heads	of	the	perished	50
dead	draw	nearer	to	the	blood,	until	I	had	questioned	Teiresias.
‘But	first	there	came	the	soul	of	my	companion,	Elpenor,
for	he	had	not	yet	been	buried	under	earth	of	the	wide	ways,
since	we	had	left	his	body	behind	in	Circe's	palace,
unburied	and	unwept,	with	this	other	errand	before	us.
55	I	broke	into	tears	at	the	sight	of	him,	and	my	heart	pitied	him,	and	so	I
spoke	aloud	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	“Elpenor,	how
did	you	come	here	beneath	the	fog	and	the	darkness?
You	have	come	faster	on	foot	than	I	could	in	my	black	ship.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	he	groaned	aloud	and	spoke	and	answered:
60	“Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
the	evil	will	of	the	spirit	and	the	wild	wine	bewildered	me.
I	lay	down	on	the	roof	of	Circe's	palace,	and	never	thought,
when	I	went	down,	to	go	by	way	of	the	long	ladder,
The	prophecy	of	Elpenor
but	blundered	straight	off	the	edge	of	the	roof,	so	that	my	neck	bone	65
was	broken	out	of	its	sockets,	and	my	soul	went	down	to	Hades’.
But	now	I	pray	you,	by	those	you	have	yet	to	see,	who	are	not	here,	by
your	wife,	and	by	your	father,	who	reared	you	when	you	were	little,	and	by
Telemachos	whom	you	left	alone	in	your	palace;
for	I	know	that	after	you	leave	this	place	and	the	house	of	Hades	70	you
will	put	back	with	your	well-made	ship	to	the	island,	Aiaia;	there	at	that
time,	my	lord,	I	ask	that	you	remember	me,
and	do	not	go	and	leave	me	behind	unwept,	unburied,
when	you	leave,	for	fear	I	might	become	the	gods’	curse	upon	you;	but
burn	me	there	with	all	my	armor	that	belongs	to	me,
75	and	heap	up	a	grave	mound	beside	the	beach	of	the	gray	sea,
for	an	unhappy	man,	so	that	those	to	come	will	know	of	me.
Do	this	for	me,	and	on	top	of	the	grave	mound	plant	the	oar
with	which	I	rowed	when	I	was	alive	and	among	my	companions.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	I	in	turn	spoke	to	him	in	answer:
80	“All	this,	my	unhappy	friend,	I	will	do	for	you	as	you	ask	me.”
‘So	we	two	stayed	there	exchanging	our	sad	words,	I	on
one	side	holding	my	sword	over	the	blood,	while	opposite
me	the	phantom	of	my	companion	talked	long	with	me.
‘Next	there	came	to	me	the	soul	of	my	dead	mother,
85	
Antikleia
,	daughter	of	great-hearted	
Autolykos
,	whom	I	had	left	alive	when
I	went	to	sacred	Ilion.
I	broke	into	tears	at	the	sight	of	her	and	my	heart	pitied	her,	but	even	so,
for	all	my	thronging	sorrow,	I	would	not
let	her	draw	near	the	blood	until	I	had	questioned	Teiresias.
90	‘Now	came	the	soul	of	Teiresias	the	Theban,	holding	a	staff	of	gold,	and	he
knew	who	I	was,	and	spoke	to	me:	“Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,
resourceful	Odysseus,
how	is	it	then,	unhappy	man,	you	have	left	the	sunlight
and	come	here,	to	look	on	dead	men,	and	this	place	without	pleasure?
95	Now	draw	back	from	the	pit,	and	hold	your	sharp	sword	away	from	me,	so
that	I	can	drink	of	the	blood	and	speak	the	truth	to	you.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	I,	holding	away	the	sword	with	the	silver
nails,	pushed	it	back	in	the	sheath,	and	the	flawless	prophet,	after	he	had
drunk	the	blood,	began	speaking	to	me.
100	“Glorious	Odysseus,	what	you	are	after	is	sweet	homecoming,
but	the	god	will	make	it	hard	for	you.	I	think	you	will	not
escape	the	Shaker	of	the	Earth,	who	holds	a	grudge	against	you
about	the	last	voyage	of	Odysseus
in	his	heart,	and	because	you	blinded	his	dear	son,	hates	you.
But	even	so	and	still	you	might	come	back,	after	much	suffering,	105	if
you	can	contain	your	own	desire,	and	contain	your	companions’,	at	that
time	when	you	first	put	in	your	well-made	vessel
at	the	island	
Thrinakia
,	escaping	the	sea's	blue	water,	and	there	discover
pasturing	the	cattle	and	fat	sheep
of	Helios,	who	sees	all	things,	and	listens	to	all	things.
110	Then,	if	you	keep	your	mind	on	homecoming,	and	leave	these	unharmed,
you	might	all	make	your	way	to	Ithaka,	after	much	suffering;
but	if	you	do	harm	them,	then	I	testify	to	the	destruction
of	your	ship	and	your	companions,	but	if	you	yourself	get	clear,	you	will
come	home	in	bad	case,	with	the	loss	of	all	your	companions,	115	in
someone	else's	ship,	and	find	troubles	in	your	household,	insolent	men,
who	are	eating	away	your	livelihood
and	courting	your	godlike	wife	and	offering	gifts	to	win	her.
You	may	punish	the	violences	of	these	men,	when	you	come	home.
But	after	you	have	killed	these	suitors	in	your	own	palace,
120	either	by	treachery,	or	openly	with	the	sharp	bronze,
then	you	must	take	up	your	well-shaped	oar	and	go	on	a	journey	until	you
come	where	there	are	men	living	who	know	nothing
of	the	sea,	and	who	eat	food	that	is	not	mixed	with	salt,	who	never	have
known	ships	whose	cheeks	are	painted	purple,	who	never
125	have	known	well-shaped	oars,	which	act	for	ships	as	wings	do.
And	I	will	tell	you	a	very	clear	proof,	and	you	cannot	miss	it.
When,	as	you	walk,	some	other	wayfarer	happens	to	meet	you,
and	says	you	carry	a	winnow-fan	on	your	bright	shoulder,
then	you	must	plant	your	well-shaped	oar	in	the	ground,	and	render	130
ceremonious	sacrifice	to	the	lord	Poseidon,
one	ram	and	one	bull,	and	a	mounter	of	sows,	a	boar	pig,
and	make	your	way	home	again	and	render	holy	hecatombs
to	the	immortal	gods	who	hold	the	wide	heaven,	all
of	them	in	order.	Death	will	come	to	you	from	the	sea,	in
135	some	altogether	unwarlike	way,	and	it	will	end	you
in	the	ebbing	time	of	a	sleek	old	age.	Your	people
about	you	will	be	prosperous.	All	this	is	true	that	I	tell	you.”
‘So	he	spoke,	but	I	in	turn	said	to	him	in	answer:
“All	this,	Teiresias,	surely	must	be	as	the	gods	spun	it.
140	But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
I	see	before	me	now	the	soul	of	my	perished	mother,
Antikleia	his	mother	tells	Odysseus
but	she	sits	beside	the	blood	in	silence,	and	has	not	yet	deigned	to	look
directly	at	her	own	son	and	speak	a	word	to	me.
Tell	me,	lord,	what	will	make	her	know	me,	and	know	my	presence?”
145	‘So	I	spoke,	and	he	at	once	said	to	me	in	answer:	“Easily	I	will	tell	you
and	put	it	in	your	understanding.
Any	one	of	the	perished	dead	you	allow	to	come	up
to	the	blood	will	give	you	a	true	answer,	but	if	you	begrudge	this	to	any
one,	he	will	return	to	the	place	where	he	came	from.”
150	‘So	speaking,	the	soul	of	the	lord	Teiresias	went	back	into	the	house	of
Hades,	once	he	had	uttered	his	prophecies,	while	I	waited	steadily	where	I
was	standing,	until	my	mother
came	and	drank	the	dark-clouding	blood,	and	at	once	she	knew	me,	and
full	of	lamentation	she	spoke	to	me	in	winged	words:
155	“My	child,	how	did	you	come	here	beneath	the	fog	and	the	darkness	and
still	alive?	All	this	is	hard	for	the	living	to	look	on,
for	in	between	lie	the	great	rivers	and	terrible	waters
that	flow,	Ocean	first	of	all,	which	there	is	no	means	of	crossing	on	foot,
not	unless	one	has	a	well-made	ship.	Are	you
160	come	now	to	this	place	from	Troy,	with	your	ship	and	your	companions,
after	wandering	a	long	time,	and	have	you	not	yet	come
to	Ithaka,	and	there	seen	your	wife	in	your	palace?”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	I	in	turn	said	to	her	in	answer:
“Mother,	a	duty	brought	me	here	to	the	house	of	Hades.
165	I	had	to	consult	the	soul	of	Teiresias	the	Theban.
For	I	have	not	yet	been	near	Achaian	country,	nor	ever
set	foot	on	our	land,	but	always	suffering	I	have	wandered
since	the	time	I	first	went	along	with	great	Agamemnon
to	Ilion,	land	of	good	horses,	and	the	battle	against	the	Trojans.
170	But	come	now,	tell	me	this,	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
What	doom	of	death	that	lays	men	low	has	been	your	undoing?
Was	it	a	long	sickness,	or	did	Artemis	of	the	arrows
come	upon	you	with	her	painless	shafts,	and	destroy	you?
And	tell	me	of	my	father	and	son	whom	I	left	behind.	Is
175	my	inheritance	still	with	them,	or	does	some	other
man	hold	them	now,	and	thinks	I	will	come	no	more?	Tell	me
about	the	wife	I	married,	what	she	wants,	what	she	is	thinking,	and	whether
she	stays	fast	by	my	son,	and	guards	everything,
or	if	she	has	married	the	best	man	among	the	Achaians.”
180	‘So	I	spoke,	and	my	queenly	mother	answered	me	quickly:
something	about	Ithaka
“All	too	much	with	enduring	heart	she	does	wait	for	you	there	in	your	own
palace,	and	always	with	her	the	wretched	nights	and	the	days	also	waste
her	away	with	weeping.
No	one	yet	holds	your	fine	inheritance,	but	in	freedom
185	Telemachos	administers	your	allotted	lands,	and	apportions
the	equal	feasts,	work	that	befits	a	man	with	authority
to	judge,	for	all	call	him	in.	Your	father	remains,	on	the	estate	where	he	is,
and	does	not	go	to	the	city.	There	is	no	bed	there	nor	is	there	bed	clothing
nor	blankets	nor	shining	coverlets,	190	but	in	the	winter	time	he	sleeps	in
the	house,	where	the	thralls	do,	in	the	dirt	next	to	the	fire,	and	with	foul
clothing	upon	him;	but	when	the	summer	comes	and	the	blossoming	time
of	harvest,	everywhere	he	has	places	to	sleep	on	the	ground,	on	fallen
leaves	in	piles	along	the	rising	ground	of	his	orchard,
195	and	there	he	lies,	grieving,	and	the	sorrow	grows	big	within	him	as	he
longs	for	your	homecoming,	and	harsh	old	age	is	on	him.
And	so	it	was	with	me	also	and	that	was	the	reason	I	perished,	nor	in	my
palace	did	the	lady	of	arrows,	well-aiming,
come	upon	me	with	her	painless	shafts,	and	destroy	me,
200	nor	was	I	visited	by	sickness,	which	beyond	other
things	takes	the	life	out	of	the	body	with	hateful	weakness,
but,	shining	Odysseus,	it	was	my	longing	for	you,	your	cleverness	and	your
gentle	ways,	that	took	the	sweet	spirit	of	life	from	me.”
‘So	she	spoke,	but	I,	pondering	it	in	my	heart,	yet	wished
205	to	take	the	soul	of	my	dead	mother	in	my	arms.	Three	times
I	started	toward	her,	and	my	heart	was	urgent	to	hold	her,
and	three	times	she	fluttered	out	of	my	hands	like	a	shadow
or	a	dream,	and	the	sorrow	sharpened	at	the	heart	within	me,
and	so	I	spoke	to	her	and	addressed	her	in	winged	words,	saying:	210
“Mother,	why	will	you	not	wait	for	me,	when	I	am	trying
to	hold	you,	so	that	even	in	Hades’	with	our	arms	embracing
we	can	both	take	the	satisfaction	of	dismal	mourning?
Or	are	you	nothing	but	an	image	that	proud	Persephone
sent	my	way,	to	make	me	grieve	all	the	more	for	sorrow?”
215	‘So	I	spoke,	and	my	queenly	mother	answered	me	quickly:	“Oh	my	child,
ill-fated	beyond	all	other	mortals,	this	is	not	Persephone,	daughter	of
Zeus,	beguiling	you,
but	it	is	only	what	happens,	when	they	die,	to	all	mortals.
The	sinews	no	longer	hold	the	flesh	and	the	bones	together,
The	queens	of	the	past
220	and	once	the	spirit	has	left	the	white	bones,	all	the	rest
of	the	body	is	made	subject	to	the	fire's	strong	fury,
but	the	soul	flitters	out	like	a	dream	and	flies	away.	Therefore	you	must
strive	back	toward	the	light	again	with	all	speed;	but	remember	these
things	for	your	wife,	so	you	may	tell	her	hereafter.”
225	‘So	we	two	were	conversing	back	and	forth,	and	the	women	came	to	me.
They	were	sent	my	way	by	proud	Persephone.
These	were	all	who	had	been	the	wives	and	daughters	of	princes,	and	now
they	gathered	in	swarms	around	the	dark	blood.	I	then	thought	about	a	way
to	question	them,	each	by	herself,
230	and	as	I	thought,	this	was	the	plan	that	seemed	best	to	me;
drawing	out	the	long-edged	sword	from	beside	my	big	thigh,
I	would	not	let	them	all	drink	the	dark	blood	at	the	same	time.
So	they	waited	and	came	to	me	in	order,	and	each	one
told	me	about	her	origin,	and	I	questioned	all	of	them.
235	‘There	first	I	saw	
Tyro
,	gloriously	descended,	and	she	told	me	she	was	the
daughter	of	stately	
Salmoneus
,	but	said	she	was	the	wife	of	Kretheus,	the
son	of	
Aiolos
,	and	she	was	in	love	with	a	river,	godlike	
Enipeus
,	by	far	the
handsomest	of	all	those	rivers	whose	streams	cross	over
240	the	earth,	and	she	used	to	haunt	Enipeus’	beautiful	waters;
taking	his	likeness,	the	god	who	circles	the	earth	and	shakes	it	lay	with	her
where	the	swirling	river	finds	its	outlet,
and	a	sea-blue	wave	curved	into	a	hill	of	water	reared	up
about	the	two,	to	hide	the	god	and	the	mortal	woman;
245	and	he	broke	her	virgin	zone	and	drifted	a	sleep	upon	her.
But	when	the	god	had	finished	with	the	act	of	lovemaking,
he	took	her	by	the	hand	and	spoke	to	her	and	named	her,	saying:	“Be
happy,	lady,	in	this	love,	and	when	the	year	passes
you	will	bear	glorious	children,	for	the	couplings	of	the	immortals	250	are
not	without	issue.	You	must	look	after	them,	and	raise	them.
Go	home	now	and	hold	your	peace	and	tell	nobody
my	name,	but	I	tell	it	to	you;	I	am	the	Earthshaker	Poseidon.”
‘So	he	spoke	and	dived	back	into	the	heaving	water
of	the	sea,	but	she	conceived	and	bore	Pelias	and	Neleus,
255	and	both	of	these	grew	up	to	be	strong	henchmen	of	mighty
Zeus;	
Pelias
	lived,	rich	in	sheepflocks,	in	the	wide	spaces	of	
Iolkos
,	while
the	other	was	king	in	sandy	Pylos;	but	this	queen	among	women	bore	the
rest	of	her	children	to	
Kretheus
,
tell	Odysseus	their	stories
Aison
	and	
Pheres
	and	
Amythaon
	delighting	in	horses.
260	‘After	her	I	saw	
Antiope
,	who	was	the	daughter	of	
Asopos
,	who	claimed
she	had	also	lain	in	the	embraces	of	Zeus,	and	borne	two	sons	to	him,
Amphion
	and	Zethos.
These	first	established	the	foundations	of	seven-gated
Thebes,	and	built	the	bulwarks,	since	without	bulwarks	they	could	not	265
have	lived,	for	all	their	strength,	in	Thebes	of	the	wide	spaces.
‘After	her	I	saw	
Amphitryon's
	wife,	Alkmene,	who,	after	lying	in	love
in	the	embraces	of	great	Zeus,
brought	forth	
Herakles
,	lion-hearted	and	bold	of	purpose.
And	I	saw	
Megara
,	daughter	of	high-spirited	
Kreion
,	270	whom
Amphitryon's	bold	and	weariless	son	had	married.
‘I	saw	the	beautiful	
Epikaste
,	
Oidipodes’
	mother,	who	in	the	ignorance
of	her	mind	had	done	a	monstrous
thing	when	she	married	her	own	son.	He	killed	his	father
and	married	her,	but	the	gods	soon	made	it	all	known	to	mortals.
275	But	he,	for	all	his	sorrows,	in	beloved	Thebes	continued
to	be	lord	over	the	
Kadmeians
,	all	through	the	bitter	designing	of	the	gods;
while	she	went	down	to	Hades	of	the	gates,	the	strong	one,	knotting	a
noose	and	hanging	sheer	from	the	high	ceiling,
in	the	constraint	of	her	sorrow,	but	left	to	him	who	survived	her	280	all	the
sorrows	that	are	brought	to	pass	by	a	mother's	furies.
‘And	I	saw	
Chloris
,	surpassingly	lovely,	the	one	whom	Neleus	married
for	her	beauty,	giving	numberless	gifts	to	win	her.
She	was	the	youngest	daughter	of	
Iasos’
	son	Amphion,	who	once	ruled
strongly	over	
Orchomenos
	of	the	
Minyai
.
285	So	she	was	queen	of	Pylos	and	she	bore	him	glorious	children,	Nestor	and
Chromios
	and	proud	
Periklymenos
.	Also	she	bore	that	marvel	among
mortals,	majestic	
Pero
,	whom	all	the	heroes	round	about	courted,	but
Neleus	would	not	give	her	to	any,	unless	he	could	drive	away	the	broad-
faced
290	horn-curved	cattle	of	strong	
Iphikles
	out	of	
Phylake
.
It	was	hard	to	do,	and	only	the	blameless	seer	
Melampous
undertook	it,	but	he	was	bound	fast	by	the	hard	destiny
of	the	god,	and	the	painful	fetters	on	him,	and	the	loutish	oxherds.
But	when	the	months	and	the	days	had	come	to	an	end,	and	the	year	295
had	gone	full	circle	and	come	back	with	the	seasons	returning,	then	strong
Iphikles	released	him,	when	he	had	told	him
all	prophecies	he	knew;	and	the	will	of	Zeus	was	accomplished.
Interlude—Alkinoös	and	Arete
‘And	I	saw	
Leda
,	who	had	been	the	wife	of	Tyndareos,	and	she	had
borne	to	Tyndareos	two	sons	with	strong	hearts,
300	Kastor,	breaker	of	horses,	and	the	strong	boxer,	
Polydeukes
.
The	life-giving	earth	holds	both	of	them,	yet	they	are	still	living,	and,	even
underneath	the	earth,	enjoying	the	honor
of	Zeus,	they	live	still	every	other	day;	on	the	next	day
they	are	dead,	but	they	are	given	honor	even	as	gods	are.
305	‘After	her	I	saw	
Iphimedeia
,	wife	of	
Aloeus
,	but	she	told	me	how	she	had
been	joined	in	love	with	Poseidon	and	borne	two	sons	to	him,	but	these	in
the	end	had	not	lived	long,	
Otos
	like	a	god,	and	the	far-famed	
Ephialtes
;
and	these	were	the	tallest	men	the	grain-giving	earth	has	brought	forth	310
ever,	and	the	handsomest	by	far,	after	famous	Orion.
When	they	were	only	nine	years	old	they	measured	nine	cubits
across,	but	in	height	they	grew	to	nine	fathoms,	and	even	made	threats
against	the	immortal	gods	on	Olympos,	that	they	would	carry
the	turmoil	of	battle	with	all	its	many	sorrows	against	them,	315	and	were
minded	to	pile	
Ossa
	on	Olympos,	and	above	Ossa	
Pelion
	of	the	trembling
leaves,	to	climb	the	sky.	Surely	they	would	have	carried	it	out	if	they	had
come	to	maturity,
but	the	son	of	Zeus	whom	Leto	with	ordered	hair	had	borne	him,	Apollo,
killed	them	both,	before	ever	the	down	gathered
320	below	their	temples,	or	on	their	chins	the	beards	had	blossomed.
‘I	saw	
Phaidra
	and	
Prokris
	and	
Ariadne
,	the	beautiful	daughter	of
malignant	Minos.	
Theseus
	at	one	time	was	bringing	her	from	Crete	to	the
high	ground	of	sacred	Athens,	but	got	no	joy	of	her,	since	before	that
Artemis	killed	her
325	in	sea-washed	
Dia
,	when	Dionysos	bore	witness	against	her.
‘I	saw	
Maira
,	
Klymene
,	and	
Eriphyle
	the	hateful,	who	accepted
precious	gold	for	the	life	of	her	own	dear	husband.
But	I	could	not	tell	over	the	whole	number	of	them	nor	name	all	the
women	I	saw	who	were	the	wives	and	daughters	of	heroes,
330	for	before	that	the	divine	night	would	give	out.	It	is	time	now	for	my
sleep,	either	joining	my	companions	on	board	the	fast	ship,	or	here;	but
you,	and	the	gods,	will	see	to	my	homeward	journey.’
So	he	spoke,	and	all	of	them	stayed	stricken	to	silence,
held	in	thrall	by	the	story	all	through	the	shadowy	chambers.
335	Now	it	was	white-armed	Arete	who	began	the	discourse:
‘Phaiakians,	what	do	you	think	now	of	this	man	before	you
admire	Odysseus	the	storyteller
for	beauty	and	stature,	and	for	the	mind	well	balanced	within	him?
And	again	he	is	my	own	guest,	but	each	one	of	you	has	some	part	in
honoring	him.	Do	not	hurry	to	send	him	off,	nor	cut	short
340	his	gifts,	when	he	is	in	such	need,	for	you	all	have	many
possessions,	by	the	grace	of	the	gods,	stored	up	in	your	palaces.’
Then	in	turn	the	aged	hero	Echeneos	spoke	forth,
who	was	the	most	advanced	in	age	of	all	the	Phaiakians:
‘Friends,	our	circumspect	queen	is	not	off	the	mark	in	her	speaking,	345
nor	short	of	what	we	expect	of	her.	Do	then	as	she	tells	us.
From	now	on	the	word	and	the	act	belong	to	Alkinoös.’
Then	in	turn	Alkinoös	spoke	to	him	and	answered:
‘Even	so	this	word	will	be	mine	to	say,	as	long	as
I	am	alive	and	king	over	the	oar-loving	Phaiakians.
350	But	let	our	guest,	much	though	he	longs	for	the	homeward	journey,	still
endure	to	wait	till	tomorrow,	until	I	have	raised	all
the	contribution;	but	the	men	shall	see	to	his	convoy
home,	and	I	most	of	all;	for	mine	is	the	power	in	this	district.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
355	‘O	great	Alkinoös,	pre-eminent	among	all	people,
if	you	urged	me	to	stay	here	even	for	the	length	of	a	year,
and	still	sped	my	conveyance	home	and	gave	me	glorious
presents,	that	would	be	what	I	wished,	there	would	be	much	advantage	in
coming	back	with	a	fuller	hand	to	my	own	dear	country,
360	and	I	would	be	more	respected	so	and	be	more	popular
with	all	people	who	saw	me	make	my	return	to	Ithaka.’
Then	Alkinoös	answered	him	in	turn	and	said	to	him:
‘Odysseus,	we	as	we	look	upon	you	do	not	imagine
that	you	are	a	deceptive	or	thievish	man,	the	sort	that	the	black	earth	365
breeds	in	great	numbers,	people	who	wander	widely,	making	up	lying
stories,	from	which	no	one	could	learn	anything.	You	have	a	grace	upon
your	words,	and	there	is	sound	sense	within	them,	and	expertly,	as	a	singer
would	do,	you	have	told	the	story
of	the	dismal	sorrows	befallen	yourself	and	all	of	the	Argives.
370	But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer:
Did	you	see	any	of	your	godlike	companions,	who	once	with	you	went	to
Ilion	and	there	met	their	destiny?	Here	is
a	night	that	is	very	long,	it	is	endless.	It	is	not	time	yet
to	sleep	in	the	palace.	But	go	on	telling	your	wonderful	story.
375	I	myself	could	hold	out	until	the	bright	dawn,	if	only
The	story	resumed
you	could	bear	to	tell	me,	here	in	the	palace,	of	your	sufferings.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘O	great	Alkinoös,	pre-eminent	among	all	people,
there	is	a	time	for	many	words,	and	a	time	for	sleeping;
380	but	if	you	insist	on	hearing	me	still,	I	would	not	begrudge	you	the	tale	of
these	happenings	and	others	yet	more	pitiful
to	hear,	the	sorrows	of	my	companions,	who	perished	later,
who	escaped	onslaught	and	cry	of	battle,	but	perished
all	for	the	sake	of	a	vile	woman,	on	the	homeward	journey.
385	‘Now	when	chaste	Persephone	had	scattered	the	female	souls	of	the
women,	driving	them	off	in	every	direction,	there	came	the	soul	of
Agamemnon,	the	son	of	Atreus,
grieving,	and	the	souls	of	the	other	men,	who	died	with	him
and	met	their	doom	in	the	house	of	Aigisthos,	were	gathered	around	him.
390	He	knew	me	at	once,	when	he	drank	the	dark	blood,	and	fell	to
lamentation	loud	and	shrill,	and	the	tears	came	springing,
and	threw	himself	into	my	arms,	meaning	so	to	embrace	me,
but	there	was	no	force	there	any	longer,	nor	any	juice	left
now	in	his	flexible	limbs,	as	there	had	been	in	time	past.
395	I	broke	into	tears	at	the	sight	of	him	and	my	heart	pitied	him,	and	so	I
spoke	aloud	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	“Son	of	Atreus,
most	lordly	and	king	of	men,	Agamemnon,
what	doom	of	death	that	lays	men	low	has	been	your	undoing?
Was	it	with	the	ships,	and	did	Poseidon,	rousing	a	stormblast	400	of
battering	winds	that	none	would	wish	for,	prove	your	undoing?
Or	was	it	on	the	dry	land,	did	men	embattled	destroy	you
as	you	tried	to	cut	out	cattle	and	fleecy	sheep	from	their	holdings,	or
fighting	against	them	for	the	sake	of	their	city	and	women?”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	he	in	turn	said	to	me	in	answer:
405	“Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
not	in	the	ships,	nor	did	Poseidon,	rousing	a	stormblast
of	battering	winds	that	none	would	wish	for,	prove	my	destruction,	nor	on
dry	land	did	enemy	men	destroy	me	in	battle;
Aigisthos,	working	out	my	death	and	destruction,	invited
410	me	to	his	house,	and	feasted	me,	and	killed	me	there,	with	the	help	of	my
sluttish	wife,	as	one	cuts	down	an	ox	at	his	manger.
So	I	died	a	most	pitiful	death,	and	my	other	companions
were	killed	around	me	without	mercy,	like	pigs	with	shining
tusks,	in	the	house	of	a	man	rich	and	very	powerful,
The	ghost	of	Agamemnon
415	for	a	wedding,	or	a	festival,	or	a	communal	dinner.
You	have	been	present	in	your	time	at	the	slaughter	of	many
men,	killed	singly,	or	in	the	strong	encounters	of	battle;
but	beyond	all	others	you	would	have	been	sorry	at	heart
for	this	scene,	how	we	lay	sprawled	by	the	mixing	bowl	and	the	loaded	420
tables,	all	over	the	palace,	and	the	whole	floor	was	steaming	with	blood;
and	most	pitiful	was	the	voice	I	heard	of	Priam's	daughter	
Kassandra
,
killed	by	treacherous	Klytaimestra	over	me;	but	I	lifted	my	hands	and	with
them	beat	on
the	ground	as	I	died	upon	the	sword,	but	the	sluttish	woman
425	turned	away	from	me	and	was	so	hard	that	her	hands	would	not	press	shut
my	eyes	and	mouth	though	I	was	going	to	Hades’.
So	there	is	nothing	more	deadly	or	more	vile	than	a	woman
who	stores	her	mind	with	acts	that	are	of	such	sort,	as	this	one	did	when
she	thought	of	this	act	of	dishonor,	and	plotted
430	the	murder	of	her	lawful	husband.	See,	I	had	been	thinking
that	I	would	be	welcome	to	my	children	and	thralls	of	my	household	when
I	came	home,	but	she	with	thoughts	surpassingly	grisly
splashed	the	shame	on	herself	and	the	rest	of	her	sex,	on	women	still	to
come,	even	on	the	one	whose	acts	are	virtuous.”
435	‘So	he	spoke,	and	I	again	said	to	him	in	answer:	“Shame	it	is,	how	most
terribly	Zeus	of	the	wide	brows	from	the	beginning	has	been	hateful	to	the
seed	of	Atreus
through	the	schemes	of	women.	Many	of	us	died	for	the	sake	of	Helen,	and
when	you	were	far,	Klytaimestra	plotted	treason	against	you.”
440	‘So	I	spoke,	and	he	in	turn	said	to	me	in	answer:	“So	by	this,	do	not	be	too
easy	even	with	your	wife,	nor	give	her	an	entire	account	of	all	you	are
sure	of.
Tell	her	part	of	it,	but	let	the	rest	be	hidden	in	silence.
And	yet	you,	Odysseus,	will	never	be	murdered	by	your	wife.
445	The	daughter	of	Ikarios,	circumspect	Penelope,
is	all	too	virtuous	and	her	mind	is	stored	with	good	thoughts.
Ah	well.	She	was	only	a	young	wife	when	we	left	her
and	went	off	to	the	fighting,	and	she	had	an	infant	child	then	at	her	breast.
That	child	now	must	sit	with	the	men	and	be	counted.
450	Happy	he!	For	his	dear	father	will	come	back,	and	see	him,
and	he	will	fold	his	father	in	his	arms,	as	is	right.	My	wife	never	even	let
me	feed	my	eyes	with	the	sight	of
my	own	son,	but	before	that	I	myself	was	killed	by	her.
Interview	with	the	ghost	of	Achilleus
And	put	away	in	your	heart	this	other	thing	that	I	tell	you.
455	When	you	bring	your	ship	in	to	your	own	dear	country,	do	it
secretly,	not	in	the	open.	There	is	no	trusting	in	women.
But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer;
tell	me	if	you	happened	to	hear	that	my	son	was	still	living,	whether
perhaps	in	Orchomenos,	or	in	sandy	Pylos,
460	or	perhaps	with	Menelaos	in	wide	Sparta;	for	nowhere
upon	the	earth	has	there	been	any	death	of	noble	Orestes.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	I	again	said	to	him	in	answer:
“Son	of	Atreus,	why	do	you	ask	me	that?	I	do	not	know
if	he	is	alive	or	dead.	It	is	bad	to	babble	emptily.”
465	‘So	we	two	stood	there	exchanging	our	sad	words,	grieving	both	together
and	shedding	the	big	tears.	After	this,	there	came	to	us	the	soul	of	Peleus’
son,	
Achilleus
,	and	the	soul	of	Patroklos	and	the	soul	of	stately
Antilochos,	and	the	soul	of	
Aias
,	who	for	beauty	and	stature	was	greatest
470	of	all	the	Danaans,	next	to	the	stately	son	of	Peleus.
The	soul	of	swift-footed	Achilleus,	scion	of	Aiakos,	knew	me,	and	full	of
lamentation	he	spoke	to	me	in	winged	words:
“Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
hard	man,	what	made	you	think	of	this	bigger	endeavor,	how	could	you
475	endure	to	come	down	here	to	Hades’	place,	where	the	senseless	dead
men	dwell,	mere	imitations	of	perished	mortals?”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	I	again	said	to	him	in	answer:
“Son	of	Peleus,	far	the	greatest	of	the	Achaians,	Achilleus,
I	came	for	the	need	to	consult	Teiresias,	if	he	might	tell	me	480	some	plan
by	which	I	might	come	back	to	rocky	Ithaka;
for	I	have	not	yet	been	near	Achaian	country,	nor	ever
set	foot	on	my	land,	but	always	I	have	troubles.	Achilleus,
no	man	before	has	been	more	blessed	than	you,	nor	ever
will	be.	Before,	when	you	were	alive,	we	Argives	honored	you
485	as	we	did	the	gods,	and	now	in	this	place	you	have	great	authority	over
the	dead.	Do	not	grieve,	even	in	death,	Achilleus.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	he	in	turn	said	to	me	in	answer:
“O	shining	Odysseus,	never	try	to	console	me	for	dying.
I	would	rather	follow	the	plow	as	thrall	to	another
490	man,	one	with	no	land	allotted	him	and	not	much	to	live	on,
than	be	a	king	over	all	the	perished	dead.	But	come	now,
tell	me	anything	you	have	heard	of	my	proud	son,	whether
Memories	of	Troy
or	not	he	went	along	to	war	to	fight	as	a	champion;
and	tell	me	anything	you	have	heard	about	stately	Peleus,
495	whether	he	still	keeps	his	position	among	the	Myrmidon
hordes,	or	whether	in	
Hellas
	and	
Phthia
	they	have	diminished	his	state,
because	old	age	constrains	his	hands	and	feet,	and	I	am	no	longer	there
under	the	light	of	the	sun	to	help	him,
not	the	man	I	used	to	be	once,	when	in	the	wide	Troad
500	I	killed	the	best	of	their	people,	fighting	for	the	Argives.	If	only	for	a	little
while	I	could	come	like	that	to	the	house	of	my	father,	my	force	and	my
invincible	hands	would	terrify	such	men
as	use	force	on	him	and	keep	him	away	from	his	rightful	honors.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	I	again	said	to	him	in	answer:
505	“I	have	no	report	to	give	you	of	stately	Peleus,
but	as	for	your	beloved	son	
Neoptolemos
,	I	will	tell	you,	since	you	ask	me
to	do	it,	all	the	true	story;
for	I	myself,	in	the	hollow	hull	of	a	balanced	ship,	brought	him	over	from
Skyros
,	to	join	the	strong-greaved	Achaians.	Whenever	510	we,	around	the
city	of	Troy,	talked	over	our	counsels,
he	would	always	speak	first,	and	never	blunder.	In	speaking
only	godlike	Nestor	and	I	were	better	than	he	was.
And	when	we	Achaians	fought	in	the	Trojan	plain,	he	never
would	hang	back	where	there	were	plenty	of	other	men,	nor	stay	with	515
the	masses,	but	run	far	out	in	front,	giving	way	to	no	man
for	fury,	and	many	were	those	he	killed	in	the	terrible	fighting.
I	could	not	tell	over	the	number	of	all	nor	name	all
the	people	he	killed	as	he	fought	for	the	Argives,	but	what	a	great	man	was
one,	the	son	of	
Telephos
	he	slew	with	the	brazen	520	spear,	the	hero
Eurypylos
,	and	many	
Keteian
companions	were	killed	about	him,	by	reason	of	womanish	presents.
Next	to	great	
Memnon
,	this	was	the	finest	man	I	ever	saw.	Again,	when	we
who	were	best	of	the	Argives	entered
the	horse	that	Epeios	made,	and	all	the	command	was	given
525	to	me,	to	keep	close	hidden	inside,	or	sally	out	from	it,
the	other	leaders	of	the	Danaans	and	men	of	counsel
were	wiping	their	tears	away	and	the	limbs	were	shaking	under	each	man
of	them;	but	never	at	any	time	did	I	see	him
losing	his	handsome	color	and	going	pale,	or	wiping
530	the	tears	off	his	face,	but	rather	he	implored	me	to	let	him	sally	out	of	the
horse;	he	kept	feeling	for	his	sword	hilt
The	angry	ghost	of	Aias
and	spear	weighted	with	bronze,	full	of	evil	thoughts	for	the	Trojans.
But	after	we	had	sacked	the	sheer	citadel	of	Priam,
with	his	fair	share	and	a	princely	prize	of	his	own,	he	boarded	535	his	ship,
unscathed;	he	had	not	been	hit	by	thrown	and	piercing	bronze,	nor	stabbed
in	close-up	combat,	as	often	happens
in	fighting.	The	War	God	rages	at	all,	and	favors	no	man.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	the	soul	of	the	swift-footed	scion	of	
Aiakos
stalked	away	in	long	strides	across	the	meadow	of	asphodel,
540	happy	for	what	I	had	said	of	his	son,	and	how	he	was	famous.
‘Now	the	rest	of	the	souls	of	the	perished	dead	stood	near	me
grieving,	and	each	one	spoke	to	me	and	told	of	his	sorrows.
Only	the	soul	of	Telamonian	Aias	stood	off
at	a	distance	from	me,	angry	still	over	that	decision
545	I	won	against	him,	when	beside	the	ships	we	disputed
our	cases	for	the	arms	of	Achilleus.	His	queenly	mother
set	them	as	prize,	and	the	sons	of	the	Trojans,	with	Pallas	Athene,	judged;
and	I	wish	I	had	never	won	in	a	contest	like	this,
so	high	a	head	has	gone	under	the	ground	for	the	sake	of	that	armor,	550
Aias,	who	for	beauty	and	for	achievement	surpassed
all	the	Danaans	next	to	the	stately	son	of	Peleus.
So	I	spoke	to	him	now	in	words	of	conciliation:
“Aias,	son	of	stately	
Telamon
,	could	you	then	never	even	in	death	forget
your	anger	against	me,	because	of
555	that	cursed	armor?	The	gods	made	it	to	pain	the	Achaians,
so	great	a	bulwark	were	you,	who	were	lost	to	them.	We	Achaians	grieved
for	your	death	as	incessantly	as	for	Achilleus
the	son	of	Peleus	at	his	death,	and	there	is	no	other
to	blame,	but	Zeus;	he,	in	his	terrible	hate	for	the	army
560	of	Danaan	spearmen,	visited	this	destruction	upon	you.
Come	nearer,	my	lord,	so	you	can	hear	what	I	say	and	listen
to	my	story;	suppress	your	anger	and	lordly	spirit.”
‘So	I	spoke.	He	gave	no	answer,	but	went	off	after
the	other	souls	of	the	perished	dead	men,	into	the	darkness.
565	There,	despite	his	anger,	he	might	have	spoken,	or	I	might
have	spoken	to	him,	but	the	heart	in	my	inward	breast	wanted
still	to	see	the	souls	of	the	other	perished	dead	men.
‘There	I	saw	Minos,	the	glorious	son	of	Zeus,	seated,
holding	a	golden	scepter	and	issuing	judgments	among
570	the	dead,	who	all	around	the	great	lord	argued	their	cases,
Heroes	in	torment—Herakles
some	sitting	and	some	standing,	by	the	wide-gated	house	of	Hades.
‘After	him	I	was	aware	of	gigantic	Orion
in	the	meadow	of	asphodel,	rounding	up	and	driving	together
wild	animals	he	himself	had	killed	in	the	lonely	mountains,
575	holding	in	his	hands	a	brazen	club,	forever	unbroken.
‘And	I	saw	
Tityos
,	Earth's	glorious	son,	lying	in	the	plain,	and
sprawled	over	nine	acres.	Two	vultures,
sitting	one	on	either	side,	were	tearing	his	liver,
plunging	inside	the	caul.	With	his	hands	he	could	not	beat	them	580	away.
He	had	manhandled	Leto,	the	honored	consort
of	Zeus,	as	she	went	through	spacious	
Panopeus
,	toward	Pytho.
‘And	I	saw	
Tantalos
	also,	suffering	hard	pains,	standing	in	lake	water
that	came	up	to	his	chin,	and	thirsty
as	he	was,	he	tried	to	drink,	but	could	capture	nothing;
585	for	every	time	the	old	man,	trying	to	drink,	stooped	over,
the	water	would	drain	away	and	disappear,	and	the	black	earth	showed	at
his	feet,	and	the	divinity	dried	it	away.	Over
his	head	trees	with	lofty	branches	had	fruit	like	a	shower	descending,	pear
trees	and	pomegranate	trees	and	apple	trees	with	fruit	shining,	590	and	figs
that	were	sweet	and	olives	ripened	well,	but	each	time	the	old	man	would
straighten	up	and	reach	with	his	hands	for	them,	the	wind	would	toss	them
away	toward	the	clouds	overhanging.
‘Also	I	saw	
Sisyphos
.	He	was	suffering	strong	pains,	and	with	both
arms	embracing	the	monstrous	stone,	struggling
595	with	hands	and	feet	alike,	he	would	try	to	push	the	stone	upward	to	the
crest	of	the	hill,	but	when	it	was	on	the	point	of	going	over	the	top,	the
force	of	gravity	turned	it	backward,
and	the	pitiless	stone	rolled	back	down	to	the	level.	He	then	tried	once
more	to	push	it	up,	straining	hard,	and	sweat	ran
600	all	down	his	body,	and	over	his	head	a	cloud	of	dust	rose.
‘After	him	I	was	aware	of	powerful	Herakles;
his	image,	that	is,	but	he	himself	among	the	immortal
gods	enjoys	their	festivals,	married	to	sweet-stepping
Hebe
,	child	of	great	Zeus	and	Hera	of	the	golden	sandals.
605	All	around	him	was	a	clamor	of	the	dead	as	of	birds	scattering	scared	in
every	direction;	but	he	came	on,	like	dark	night,
holding	his	bow	bare	with	an	arrow	laid	on	the	bowstring,
and	forever	looking,	as	one	who	shot,	with	terrible	glances.
There	was	a	terrible	belt	crossed	over	his	chest,	and	a	golden
Return	to	Circe's	island
610	baldrick,	with	marvelous	works	of	art	that	figured	upon	it,
bears,	and	lions	with	glaring	eyes,	and	boars	of	the	forests,	the	battles	and
the	quarrels,	the	murders	and	the	manslaughters.
May	he	who	artfully	designed	them,	and	artfully	put	them
upon	that	baldrick,	never	again	do	any	designing.
615	He	recognized	me	at	once	as	soon	as	his	eyes	had	seen	me,
and	full	of	lamentation	he	spoke	to	me	in	winged	words:
“Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
unhappy	man,	are	you	too	leading	some	wretched	destiny
such	as	I	too	pursued	when	I	went	still	in	the	sunlight?
620	For	I	was	son	of	Kronian	Zeus,	but	I	had	an	endless
spell	of	misery.	I	was	made	bondman	to	one	who	was	far	worse
than	I,	and	he	loaded	my	difficult	labors	on	me.	One	time
he	sent	me	here	to	fetch	the	dog	back,	and	thought	there	could	be	no	other
labor	to	be	devised	more	difficult	than	that
625	one,	but	I	brought	the	dog	up	and	led	him	from	the	realm	of	Hades,	and
Hermes	saw	me	on	my	way,	with	Pallas	Athene.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	went	back	into	the	realm	of	Hades,
but	I	stayed	fast	in	place	where	I	was,	to	see	if	some	other
one	of	the	generation	of	heroes	who	died	before	me
630	would	come;	and	I	might	have	seen	men	earlier	still,	whom	I	wanted	to
see,	
Perithoös
	and	Theseus,	gods’	glorious	children;	but	before	that	the
hordes	of	the	dead	men	gathered	about	me
with	inhuman	clamor,	and	green	fear	took	hold	of	me
with	the	thought	that	proud	Persephone	might	send	up	against	me	635
some	
gorgonish
	head	of	a	terrible	monster	up	out	of	Hades’.
So,	going	back	on	board	my	ship,	I	told	my	companions
also	to	go	aboard,	and	to	cast	off	the	stern	cables;
and	quickly	they	went	aboard	the	ship	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks,	and	the	swell
of	the	current	carried	her	down	the	Ocean	river	640	with	rowing	at	first,
but	after	that	on	a	fair	wind	following.
BOOK	XII
‘Now	when	our	ship	had	left	the	stream	of	the	Ocean	river,	and	come	back
to	the	wide	crossing	of	the	sea's	waves,	and	to	the	island	of	Aiaia,	where
lies	the	house	of	the	early	Dawn,	her	dancing	spaces,	and	where	Helios,	the
sun,	makes	his	uprising,
5	making	this	point	we	ran	our	ship	on	the	sand	and	beached	her,	and	we
ourselves	stepped	out	onto	the	break	of	the	sea	beach,	and	there	we	fell
asleep	and	waited	for	the	divine	Dawn.
‘But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
then	I	sent	my	companions	away	to	the	house	of	Circe
10	to	bring	back	the	body	of	Elpenor,	who	had	died	there.
Then	we	cut	logs,	and	where	the	extreme	of	the	foreland	jutted	out,	we
buried	him,	sorrowful,	shedding	warm	tears	for	him.
But	when	the	dead	man	had	burned	and	the	dead	man's	armor,	piling	the
grave	mound	and	pulling	the	gravestone	to	stand	above	it,	15	we	planted
the	well-shaped	oar	in	the	very	top	of	the	grave	mound.
‘So	we	were	busy	each	with	our	various	work,	nor	was	Circe
unaware	that	we	had	come	back	from	Hades’.	Presently
she	came,	attired,	and	her	attendants	following	carried
bread	at	her	will	and	many	meats	and	the	shining	red	wine.
20	Bright	among	goddesses	she	stood	in	our	midst	and	addressed	us:
“Unhappy	men,	who	went	alive	to	the	house	of	Hades,
so	dying	twice,	when	all	the	rest	of	mankind	die	only
once,	come	then	eat	what	is	there	and	drink	your	wine,	staying	here	all	the
rest	of	the	day,	and	then	tomorrow,	when	dawn	shows,
Instructions	from	Circe
25	you	shall	sail,	and	I	will	show	you	the	way	and	make	plain	all	details,	so
that	neither	by	land	nor	on	the	salt	water	you	may	suffer	and	come	to	grief
by	unhappy	bad	designing.”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	the	proud	heart	in	us	was	persuaded.
So	for	the	whole	length	of	the	day	until	the	sun's	setting,	30	we	sat	there
feasting	on	unlimited	meat	and	sweet	wine.
But	when	the	sun	went	down	and	the	sacred	darkness	came	over,	the	men
lay	down	to	sleep	all	by	the	ship's	stern	cables,	but	she,	taking	me	by	the
hand,	made	me	sit	down	away	from	my	dear	companions,	and	talked	with
me,	and	asked	me	the	details	35	of	everything,	and	I	recited	all,	just	as	it
had	happened.
Then	the	queenly	Circe	spoke	in	words	and	addressed	me:
“So	all	that	has	been	duly	done.	Listen	now,	I	will	tell	you	all,	but	the	very
god	himself	will	make	you	remember.
You	will	come	first	of	all	to	the	
Sirens
,	who	are	enchanters	40	of	all
mankind	and	whoever	comes	their	way;	and	that	man
who	unsuspecting	approaches	them,	and	listens	to	the	Sirens	singing,	has
no	prospect	of	coming	home	and	delighting
his	wife	and	little	children	as	they	stand	about	him	in	greeting,	but	the
Sirens	by	the	melody	of	their	singing	enchant	him.
45	They	sit	in	their	meadow,	but	the	beach	before	it	is	piled	with	boneheaps	of
men	now	rotted	away,	and	the	skins	shrivel	upon	them.
You	must	drive	straight	on	past,	but	melt	down	sweet	wax	of	honey	and
with	it	stop	your	companions’	ears,	so	none	can	listen;	the	rest,	that	is,	but
if	you	yourself	are	wanting	to	hear	them,	50	then	have	them	tie	you	hand
and	foot	on	the	fast	ship,	standing	upright	against	the	mast	with	the	ropes’
ends	lashed	around	it,	so	that	you	can	have	joy	in	hearing	the	song	of	the
Sirens;	but	if	you	supplicate	your	men	and	implore	them	to	set	you	free,
then	they	must	tie	you	fast	with	even	more	lashings.
55	“Then,	for	the	time	when	your	companions	have	driven	you	past	them,	for
that	time	I	will	no	longer	tell	you	in	detail	which	way	of	the	two	your
course	must	lie,	but	you	yourself	must	consider	this	in	your	own	mind.	I
will	tell	you	the	two	ways	of	it.
On	one	side	there	are	overhanging	rocks,	and	against	them	60	crashes	the
heavy	swell	of	dark-eyed	Amphitrite.
The	blessed	gods	call	these	rocks	the	Rovers.	By	this	way	not	even	any
flying	thing,	not	even	the	tremulous
The	Sirens—Skylla	and	Charybdis
doves,	which	carry	ambrosia	to	Zeus	the	father,	can	pass	through,	but	every
time	the	sheer	rock	catches	away	one	even
65	of	these;	but	the	Father	then	adds	another	to	keep	the	number	right.	No	ship
of	men	that	came	here	ever	has	fled	through,	but	the	waves	of	the	sea	and
storms	of	ravening	fire	carry	away	together	the	ship's	timbers	and	the
men's	bodies.
That	way	the	only	seagoing	ship	to	get	through	was	
Argo
,	70	who	is	in	all
men's	minds,	on	her	way	home	from	
Aietes
;	and	even	she	would	have	been
driven	on	the	great	rocks	that	time,	but	Hera	saw	her	through,	out	of	her
great	love	for	
Jason
.
‘“But	of	the	two	rocks,	one	reaches	up	into	the	wide	heaven
with	a	pointed	peak,	and	a	dark	cloud	stands	always	around	it,	75	and
never	at	any	time	draws	away	from	it,	nor	does	the	sunlight	ever	hold	that
peak,	either	in	the	early	or	the	late	summer,	nor	could	any	man	who	was
mortal	climb	there,	or	stand	mounted	on	the	summit,	not	if	he	had	twenty
hands	and	twenty
feet,	for	the	rock	goes	sheerly	up,	as	if	it	were	polished.
80	Halfway	up	the	cliff	there	is	a	cave,	misty-looking
and	turned	toward	Erebos	and	the	dark,	the	very	direction	from	which,	O
shining	Odysseus,	you	and	your	men	will	be	steering	your	hollow	ship;	and
from	the	hollow	ship	no	vigorous
young	man	with	a	bow	could	shoot	to	the	hole	in	the	cliffside.
85	In	that	cavern	
Skylla
	lives,	whose	howling	is	terror.
Her	voice	indeed	is	only	as	loud	as	a	new-born	puppy
could	make,	but	she	herself	is	an	evil	monster.	No	one,
not	even	a	god	encountering	her,	could	be	glad	at	that	sight.
She	has	twelve	feet,	and	all	of	them	wave	in	the	air.	She	has	six	90	necks
upon	her,	grown	to	great	length,	and	upon	each	neck	there	is	a	horrible
head,	with	teeth	in	it,	set	in	three	rows	close	together	and	stiff,	full	of	black
death.	Her	body
from	the	waist	down	is	holed	up	inside	the	hollow	cavern,	but	she	holds
her	heads	poked	out	and	away	from	the	terrible	hollow,	95	and	there	she
fishes,	peering	all	over	the	cliffside,	looking	for	dolphins	or	dogfish	to
catch	or	anything	bigger,
some	sea	monster,	of	whom	Amphitrite	keeps	so	many;
never	can	sailors	boast	aloud	that	their	ship	has	passed	her	without	any	loss
of	men,	for	with	each	of	her	heads	she	snatches	100	one	man	away	and
carries	him	off	from	the	dark-prowed	vessel.
‘“The	other	cliff	is	lower;	you	will	see	it,	Odysseus,
Warning	about	the	cattle	of	Helios
for	they	lie	close	together,	you	could	even	cast	with	an	arrow	across.	There
is	a	great	fig	tree	grows	there,	dense	with	foliage,	and	under	this	shining
Charybdis
	sucks	down	the	black	water.
105	For	three	times	a	day	she	flows	it	up,	and	three	times	she	sucks	it	terribly
down;	may	you	not	be	there	when	she	sucks	down	water,	for	not	even	the
Earthshaker	could	rescue	you	out	of	that	evil.
But	sailing	your	ship	swiftly	drive	her	past	and	avoid	her,	and	make	for
Skylla's	rock	instead,	since	it	is	far	better	110	to	mourn	six	friends	lost	out
of	your	ship	than	the	whole	company.”
‘So	she	spoke,	but	I	in	turn	said	to	her	in	answer:
“Come	then,	goddess,	answer	me	truthfully	this:	is	there
some	way	for	me	to	escape	away	from	deadly	Charybdis,
but	yet	fight	the	other	one	off,	when	she	attacks	my	companions?”
115	‘So	I	spoke,	and	she,	shining	among	goddesses,	answered:	“Hardy	man,
your	mind	is	full	forever	of	fighting
and	battle	work.	Will	you	not	give	way	even	to	the	immortals?
She	is	no	mortal	thing	but	a	mischief	immortal,	dangerous	difficult	and
bloodthirsty,	and	there	is	no	fighting	against	her,	120	nor	any	force	of
defense.	It	is	best	to	run	away	from	her.
For	if	you	arm	for	battle	beside	her	rock	and	waste	time
there,	I	fear	she	will	make	another	outrush	and	catch	you	with	all	her
heads,	and	snatch	away	once	more	the	same	number	of	men.	Drive	by	as
hard	as	you	can,	but	invoke	
Krataiïs
.
125	She	is	the	mother	of	Skylla	and	bore	this	mischief	for	mortals,	and	she
will	stay	her	from	making	another	sally	against	you.
‘“Then	you	will	reach	the	island	Thrinakia,	where	are	pastured
the	cattle	and	the	fat	sheep	of	the	sun	god,	Helios,
seven	herds	of	oxen,	and	as	many	beautiful	sheepflocks,
130	and	fifty	to	each	herd.	There	is	no	giving	birth	among	them,	nor	do	they
ever	die	away,	and	their	shepherdesses
are	gods,	nymphs	with	sweet	hair,	
Lampetia
	and	
Phaethousa
,	whom
shining	
Neaira
	bore	to	Hyperion	the	sun	god.
These,	when	their	queenly	mother	had	given	them	birth	and	reared	them,
135	she	settled	in	the	island	Thrinakia,	far	away,	to	live
there	and	guard	their	father's	sheep	and	his	horn-curved	cattle.
Then,	if	you	keep	your	mind	on	homecoming	and	leave	these	unharmed,
you	might	all	make	your	way	to	Ithaka,	after	much	suffering;	but	if	you	do
harm	them,	then	I	testify	to	the	destruction	140	of	your	ship	and	your
companions,	but	if	you	yourself	get	clear,
Departure—the	Sirens
you	will	come	home	in	bad	case	with	the	loss	of	all	your	companions.”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	Dawn	of	the	golden	throne	came	on	us.
She,	shining	among	goddesses,	went	away,	up	the	island.
Then,	going	back	on	board	my	ship,	I	told	my	companions
145	also	to	go	aboard,	and	to	cast	off	the	stern	cables,
and	quickly	they	went	aboard	the	ship	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks,	and	sitting
well	in	order	dashed	the	oars	in	the	gray	sea;	but	fair-haired	Circe,	the
dread	goddess	who	talks	with	mortals,	sent	us	an	excellent	companion,	a
following	wind,	filling	150	the	sails,	to	carry	from	astern	the	ship	with	the
dark	prow.
We	ourselves,	over	all	the	ship	making	fast	the	running	gear,	sat	there,	and
let	the	wind	and	the	steersman	hold	her	steady.
Then,	sorrowful	as	I	was,	I	spoke	and	told	my	companions:	“Friends,	since
it	is	not	right	for	one	or	two	of	us	only	155	to	know	the	divinations	that
Circe,	bright	among	goddesses,	gave	me,	so	I	will	tell	you,	and	knowing	all
we	may	either	die,	or	turn	aside	from	death	and	escape	destruction.
First	of	all	she	tells	us	to	keep	away	from	the	magical
Sirens	and	their	singing	and	their	flowery	meadow,	but	only	160	I,	she
said,	was	to	listen	to	them,	but	you	must	tie	me
hard	in	hurtful	bonds,	to	hold	me	fast	in	position
upright	against	the	mast,	with	the	ropes’	ends	fastened	around	it;	but	if	I
supplicate	you	and	implore	you	to	set	me
free,	then	you	must	tie	me	fast	with	even	more	lashings.”
165	‘So	as	I	was	telling	all	the	details	to	my	companions,	meanwhile	the	well-
made	ship	was	coming	rapidly	closer	to	the	Sirens’	isle,	for	the	harmless
wind	was	driving	her	onward;	but	immediately	then	the	breeze	dropped,
and	a	windless
calm	fell	there,	and	some	divinity	stilled	the	tossing
170	waters.	My	companions	stood	up,	and	took	the	sails	down,	and	stowed
them	away	in	the	hollow	hull,	and	took	their	places	for	rowing,	and	with
their	planed	oarblades	whitened	the	water.
Then	I,	taking	a	great	wheel	of	wax,	with	the	sharp	bronze	cut	a	little	piece
off,	and	rubbed	it	together	in	my	heavy	175	hands,	and	soon	the	wax	grew
softer,	under	the	powerful
stress	of	the	sun,	and	the	heat	and	light	of	Hyperion's	lordling.
One	after	another,	I	stopped	the	ears	of	all	my	companions,	and	they	then
bound	me	hand	and	foot	in	the	fast	ship,	standing	upright	against	the	mast
with	the	ropes’	ends	lashed	around	it,
Passage	by	Skylla
180	and	sitting	then	to	row	they	dashed	their	oars	in	the	gray	sea.
But	when	we	were	as	far	from	the	land	as	a	voice	shouting	carries,	lightly
plying,	the	swift	ship	as	it	drew	nearer	was	seen	by	the	Sirens,	and	they
directed	their	sweet	song	toward	us:	“Come	this	way,	honored	Odysseus,
great	glory	of	the	Achaians,	185	and	stay	your	ship,	so	that	you	can	listen
here	to	our	singing;	for	no	one	else	has	ever	sailed	past	this	place	in	his
black	ship	until	he	has	listened	to	the	honey-sweet	voice	that	issues	from
our	lips;	then	goes	on,	well	pleased,	knowing	more	than	ever	he	did;	for	we
know	everything	that	the	Argives	and	Trojans	190	did	and	suffered	in	wide
Troy	through	the	gods’	despite.
Over	all	the	generous	earth	we	know	everything	that	happens.”
‘So	they	sang,	in	sweet	utterance,	and	the	heart	within	me
desired	to	listen,	and	I	signaled	my	companions	to	set	me	free,	nodding
with	my	brows,	but	they	leaned	on	and	rowed	hard,	195	and	Perimedes	and
Eurylochos,	rising	up,	straightway
fastened	me	with	even	more	lashings	and	squeezed	me	tighter.
But	when	they	had	rowed	on	past	the	Sirens,	and	we	could	no	longer	hear
their	voices	and	lost	the	sound	of	their	singing,	presently	my	eager
companions	took	away	from	their	ears	the	beeswax	200	with	which	I	had
stopped	them.	Then	they	set	me	free	from	my	lashings.
‘But	after	we	had	left	the	island	behind,	the	next	thing
we	saw	was	smoke,	and	a	heavy	surf,	and	we	heard	it	thundering.
The	men	were	terrified,	and	they	let	the	oars	fall	out	of	their	hands,	and
these	banged	all	about	in	the	wash.	The	ship	stopped	205	still,	with	the
men	no	longer	rowing	to	keep	way	on	her.
Then	I	going	up	and	down	the	ship	urged	on	my	companions,	standing
beside	each	man	and	speaking	to	him	in	kind	words:	“Dear	friends,	surely
we	are	not	unlearned	in	evils.
This	is	no	greater	evil	now	than	it	was	when	the	Cyclops
210	had	us	cooped	in	his	hollow	cave	by	force	and	violence,
but	even	there,	by	my	courage	and	counsel	and	my	intelligence,	we
escaped	away.	I	think	that	all	this	will	be	remembered	some	day	too.	Then
do	as	I	say,	let	us	all	be	won	over.
Sit	well,	all	of	you,	to	your	oarlocks,	and	dash	your	oars	deep	215	into	the
breaking	surf	of	the	water,	so	in	that	way	Zeus	might	grant	that	we	get
clear	of	this	danger	and	flee	away	from	it.
For	you,	steersman,	I	have	this	order;	so	store	it	deeply	in	your	mind,	as
you	control	the	steering	oar	of	this	hollow
with	the	loss	of	six	men
ship;	you	must	keep	her	clear	from	where	the	smoke	and	the	breakers	220
are,	and	make	hard	for	the	sea	rock	lest,	without	your	knowing,	she	might
drift	that	way,	and	you	bring	all	of	us	into	disaster.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	they	quickly	obeyed	my	words.	I	had	not
spoken	yet	of	Skylla,	a	plague	that	could	not	be	dealt	with,	for	fear	my
companions	might	be	terrified	and	give	over
225	their	rowing,	and	take	cover	inside	the	ship.	For	my	part,	I	let	go	from	my
mind	the	difficult	instruction	that	Circe	had	given	me,	for	she	told	me	not
to	be	armed	for	combat;	but	I	put	on	my	glorious	armor	and,	taking	up	two
long
spears	in	my	hands,	I	stood	bestriding	the	vessel's	foredeck	230	at	the
prow,	for	I	expected	Skylla	of	the	rocks	to	appear	first	from	that	direction,
she	who	brought	pain	to	my	companions.
I	could	not	make	her	out	anywhere,	and	my	eyes	grew	weary	from	looking
everywhere	on	the	misty	face	of	the	sea	rock.
‘So	we	sailed	up	the	narrow	strait	lamenting.	On	one	side
235	was	Skylla,	and	on	the	other	side	was	shining	Charybdis,	who	made	her
terrible	ebb	and	flow	of	the	sea's	water.
When	she	vomited	it	up,	like	a	caldron	over	a	strong	fire,	the	whole	sea
would	boil	up	in	turbulence,	and	the	foam	flying	spattered	the	pinnacles	of
the	rocks	in	either	direction;	240	but	when	in	turn	again	she	sucked	down
the	sea's	salt	water,	the	turbulence	showed	all	the	inner	sea,	and	the	rock
around	it	groaned	terribly,	and	the	ground	showed	at	the	sea's	bottom,
black	with	sand;	and	green	fear	seized	upon	my	companions.
We	in	fear	of	destruction	kept	our	eyes	on	Charybdis,
245	but	meanwhile	Skylla	out	of	the	hollow	vessel	snatched	six	of	my
companions,	the	best	of	them	for	strength	and	hands’	work,	and	when	I
turned	to	look	at	the	ship,	with	my	other	companions,	I	saw	their	feet	and
hands	from	below,	already	lifted
high	above	me,	and	they	cried	out	to	me	and	called	me
250	by	name,	the	last	time	they	ever	did	it,	in	heart's	sorrow.
And	as	a	fisherman	with	a	very	long	rod,	on	a	jutting
rock,	will	cast	his	treacherous	bait	for	the	little	fishes,	and	sinks	the	horn	of
a	field-ranging	ox	into	the	water,
then	hauls	them	up	and	throws	them	on	the	dry	land,	gasping	255	and
struggling,	so	they	gasped	and	struggled	as	they	were	hoisted	up	the	cliff.
Right	in	her	doorway	she	ate	them	up.	They	were	screaming	and	reaching
out	their	hands	to	me	in	this	horrid	encounter.
Landing	on	Thrinakia
That	was	the	most	pitiful	scene	that	these	eyes	have	looked	on	in	my
sufferings	as	I	explored	the	routes	over	the	water.
260	‘Now	when	we	had	fled	away	from	the	rocks	and	dreaded	Charybdis	and
Skylla,	next	we	made	our	way	to	the	excellent	island	of	the	god,	where
ranged	the	handsome	wide-browed	oxen,	and	many	fat	flocks	of	sheep,
belonging	to	the	Sun	God,	Hyperion.
While	I	was	on	the	black	ship,	still	out	on	the	open	water,	265	I	heard	the
lowing	of	the	cattle	as	they	were	driven
home,	and	the	bleating	of	sheep,	and	my	mind	was	struck	by	the	saying	of
the	blind	prophet,	Teiresias	the	Theban,	and	also
Aiaian	Circe.	Both	had	told	me	many	times	over
to	avoid	the	island	of	Helios	who	brings	joy	to	mortals.
270	Then	sorrowful	as	I	was	I	spoke	and	told	my	companions:
“Listen	to	what	I	say,	my	companions,	though	you	are	suffering	evils,
while	I	tell	you	the	prophecies	of	Teiresias
and	Aiaian	Circe.	Both	have	told	me	many	times	over
to	avoid	the	island	of	Helios	who	brings	joy	to	mortals,
275	for	there	they	spoke	of	the	most	dreadful	disaster	that	waited	for	us.	So
drive	the	black	ship	onward,	and	pass	the	island.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	the	inward	heart	in	them	was	broken.
At	once	Eurylochos	answered	me	with	a	bitter	saying:
“You	are	a	hard	man,	Odysseus.	Your	force	is	greater,
280	your	limbs	never	wear	out.	You	must	be	made	all	of	iron,	when	you	will
not	let	your	companions,	worn	with	hard	work	and	wanting	sleep,	set	foot
on	this	land,	where	if	we	did,	on	the	seagirt	island	we	could	once	more
make	ready	a	greedy	dinner;
but	you	force	us	to	blunder	along	just	as	we	are	through	the	running	285
night,	driven	from	the	island	over	the	misty	face	of	the	water.
In	the	nights	the	hard	stormwinds	arise,	and	they	bring	damage	to	ships.
How	could	any	of	us	escape	sheer	destruction,
if	suddenly	there	rises	the	blast	of	a	storm	from	the	bitter	blowing	of	the
South	Wind	or	the	West	Wind,	who	beyond	others	290	hammer	a	ship
apart,	in	despite	of	the	gods,	our	masters?
But	now	let	us	give	way	to	black	night's	persuasion;	let	us	make	ready	our
evening	meal,	remaining	close	by	our	fast	ship,	and	at	dawn	we	will	go
aboard	and	put	forth	onto	the	wide	sea.”
‘So	spoke	Eurylochos,	and	my	other	companions	assented.
295	I	saw	then	what	evil	the	divinity	had	in	mind	for	us,
and	ordeal	by	hunger
and	so	I	spoke	aloud	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:
“Eurylochos,	I	am	only	one	man.	You	force	me	to	it.
But	come	then	all	of	you,	swear	a	strong	oath	to	me,	that	if	we	come	upon
some	herd	of	cattle	or	on	some	great	flock
300	of	sheep,	no	one	of	you	in	evil	and	reckless	action
will	slaughter	any	ox	or	sheep.	No,	rather	than	this,	eat	at	your	pleasure	of
the	food	immortal	Circe	provided.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	they	all	swore	me	the	oath	that	I	asked	them.
But	after	they	had	sworn	me	the	oath	and	made	an	end	of	it,	305	we
beached	the	well-made	ship	inside	of	the	hollow	harbor,	close	to	sweet
water,	and	my	companions	disembarked	also
from	the	ship,	and	expertly	made	the	evening	meal	ready.
But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	they
remembered	and	they	cried	for	their	beloved	companions	310	whom	Skylla
had	caught	out	of	the	hollow	ship	and	eaten,	and	on	their	crying	a	quiet
sleep	descended;	but	after
the	third	part	of	the	night	had	come,	and	the	star	changes,	Zeus	the	cloud
gatherer	let	loose	on	us	a	gale	that	blustered	in	a	supernatural	storm,	and
huddled	under	the	cloud	scuds	315	land	alike	and	the	great	water.	Night
sprang	from	heaven.
But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,	we	berthed
our	ship,	dragging	her	into	a	hollow	sea	cave
where	the	nymphs	had	their	beautiful	dancing	places	and	sessions.
Then	I	held	an	assembly	and	spoke	my	opinion	before	them:	320	“Friends,
since	there	is	food	and	drink	stored	in	the	fast	ship,	let	us	then	keep	our
hands	off	the	cattle,	for	fear	that	something	may	befall	us.	These	are	the
cattle	and	fat	sheep	of	a	dreaded	god,	Helios,	who	sees	all	things	and
listens	to	all	things.”
‘So	I	spoke,	and	the	proud	heart	in	them	was	persuaded.
325	But	the	South	Wind	blew	for	a	whole	month	long,	nor	did	any	other	wind
befall	after	that,	but	only	the	South	and	the	East	Wind.
As	long	as	they	still	had	food	to	eat	and	red	wine,	the	men	kept	their	hands
off	the	cattle,	striving	as	they	were	for	sustenance.	Then,	when	all	the
provisions	that	had	been	in	the	ship	had	given
330	out,	they	turned	to	hunting,	forced	to	it,	and	went	ranging	after	fish	and
birds,	anything	that	they	could	lay	hands	on,	and	with	curved	hooks,	for
the	hunger	was	exhausting	their	stomachs.
Then	I	went	away	along	the	island	in	order
The	cattle	eaten
to	pray	to	the	gods,	if	any	of	them	might	show	me	some	course	335	to	sail
on,	but	when,	crossing	the	isle,	I	had	left	my	companions	behind,	I	washed
my	hands,	where	there	was	a	place	sheltered	from	the	wind,	and	prayed	to
all	the	gods	whose	hold	is	Olympos;	but	what	they	did	was	to	shed	a	sweet
sleep	on	my	eyelids,	and	Eurylochos	put	an	evil	counsel	before	his
companions:	340	“Listen	to	what	I	say,	my	companions,	though	you	are
suffering	evils.	All	deaths	are	detestable	for	wretched	mortals,
but	hunger	is	the	sorriest	way	to	die	and	encounter
fate.	Come	then,	let	us	cut	out	the	best	of	Helios'	cattle,	and	sacrifice	them
to	the	immortals	who	hold	wide	heaven,	345	and	if	we	ever	come	back	to
Ithaka,	land	of	our	fathers,	presently	we	will	build	a	rich	temple	to	the	Sun
God	Helios	Hyperion,	and	store	it	with	dedications,	many
and	good.	But	if,	in	anger	over	his	high-horned	cattle,
he	wishes	to	wreck	our	ship,	and	the	rest	of	the	gods	stand	by	him,	350	I
would	far	rather	gulp	the	waves	and	lose	my	life	in	them	once	for	all,	than
be	pinched	to	death	on	this	desolate	island.”
‘So	spoke	Eurylochos,	and	the	other	companions	assented.
At	once,	cutting	out	from	near	at	hand	the	best	of	Helios'
cattle;	for	the	handsome	broad-faced	horn-curved	oxen
355	were	pasturing	there,	not	far	from	the	dark-prowed	ship;	driving	these,
they	stationed	themselves	around	them,	and	made	their	prayers	to	the
gods,	pulling	tender	leaves	from	a	deep-leaved	oak	tree;	for	they	had	no
white	barley	left	on	the	strong-benched	vessel.
When	they	had	made	their	prayer	and	slaughtered	the	oxen	and	skinned
them,	360	they	cut	away	the	meat	from	the	thighs	and	wrapped	them	in	fat,
making	a	double	fold,	and	laid	shreds	of	flesh	upon	them;	and	since	they
had	no	wine	to	pour	on	the	burning	offerings,	they	made	a	libation	of
water,	and	roasted	all	of	the	entrails;	but	when	they	had	burned	the	thigh
pieces	and	tasted	the	vitals,	365	they	cut	all	the	remainder	into	pieces	and
spitted	them.
‘At	that	time	the	quiet	sleep	was	lost	from	my	eyelids,
and	I	went	back	down	to	my	fast	ship	and	the	sand	of	the	seashore,	but	on
my	way,	as	I	was	close	to	the	oar-swept	vessel,
the	pleasant	savor	of	cooking	meat	came	drifting	around	me,	370	and	I
cried	out	my	grief	aloud	to	the	gods	immortal:
“Father	Zeus,	and	you	other	everlasting	and	blessed
Portents—departure	from	Thrinakia
gods,	with	a	pitiless	sleep	you	lulled	me,	to	my	confusion,	and	my
companions	staying	here	dared	a	deed	that	was	monstrous.”
‘Lampetia	of	the	light	robes	ran	swift	with	the	message
375	to	Hyperion	the	Sun	God,	that	we	had	killed	his	cattle,
and	angered	at	the	heart	he	spoke	forth	among	the	immortals:	“Father
Zeus,	and	you	other	everlasting	and	blessed
gods,	punish	the	companions	of	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes;
for	they	outrageously	killed	my	cattle,	in	whom	I	always
380	delighted,	on	my	way	up	into	the	starry	heaven,
or	when	I	turned	back	again	from	heaven	toward	earth.	Unless	these	are
made	to	give	me	just	recompense	for	my	cattle,
I	will	go	down	to	Hades'	and	give	my	light	to	the	dead	men.”
‘Then	in	turn	Zeus	who	gathers	the	clouds	answered	him:
385	“Helios,	shine	on	as	you	do,	among	the	immortals
and	mortal	men,	all	over	the	grain-giving	earth.	For	my	part	I	will	strike
these	men's	fast	ship	midway	on	the	open
wine-blue	sea	with	a	shining	bolt	and	dash	it	to	pieces.”
‘All	this	I	heard	afterward	from	fair-haired	Kalypso,
390	and	she	told	me	she	herself	had	heard	it	from	the	guide,	Hermes.
‘But	when	I	came	back	again	to	the	ship	and	the	seashore,
they	all	stood	about	and	blamed	each	other,	but	we	were	not	able	to	find
any	remedy,	for	the	oxen	were	already	dead.	The	next	thing	was	that	the
gods	began	to	show	forth	portents	before	us.
395	The	skins	crawled,	and	the	meat	that	was	stuck	on	the	spits	bellowed,
both	roast	and	raw,	and	the	noise	was	like	the	lowing	of	cattle.
‘Six	days	thereafter	my	own	eager	companions	feasted
on	the	cattle	of	Helios	the	Sun	God,	cutting	the	best	ones	out;	but	when
Zeus	the	son	of	Kronos	established	the	seventh	400	day,	then	at	last	the
wind	ceased	from	its	stormy	blowing,	and	presently	we	went	aboard	and
put	forth	on	the	wide	sea,	and	set	the	mast	upright	and	hoisted	the	white
sails	on	it.
‘But	after	we	had	left	the	island	and	there	was	no	more
land	in	sight,	but	only	the	sky	and	the	sea,	then	Kronian	405	Zeus	drew	on
a	blue-black	cloud,	and	settled	it	over
the	hollow	ship,	and	the	open	sea	was	darkened	beneath	it;	and	she	ran	on,
but	not	for	a	very	long	time,	as	suddenly	a	screaming	West	Wind	came
upon	us,	stormily	blowing,
and	the	blast	of	the	stormwind	snapped	both	the	forestays	that	were
holding
Loss	of	the	ship	and	crew
410	the	mast,	and	the	mast	went	over	backwards,	and	all	the	running	gear
collapsed	in	the	wash;	and	at	the	stern	of	the	ship	the	mast	pole	crashed
down	on	the	steersman's	head	and	pounded	to	pieces	all	the	bones	of	his
head,	so	that	he	like	a	diver
dropped	from	the	high	deck,	and	the	proud	life	left	his	bones	there.
415	Zeus	with	thunder	and	lightning	together	crashed	on	our	vessel,	and,
struck	by	the	thunderbolt	of	Zeus,	she	spun	in	a	circle,	and	all	was	full	of
brimstone.	My	men	were	thrown	in	the	water,	and	bobbing	like	sea	crows
they	were	washed	away	on	the	running	waves	all	around	the	black	ship,
and	the	god	took	away	their	homecoming.
420	‘But	I	went	on	my	way	through	the	vessel,	to	where	the	high	seas	had
worked	the	keel	free	out	of	the	hull,	and	the	bare	keel	floated	on	the	swell,
which	had	broken	the	mast	off	at	the	keel;	yet	still	there	was	a	backstay
made	out	of	oxhide	fastened
to	it.	With	this	I	lashed	together	both	keel	and	mast,	then	425	rode	the	two
of	them,	while	the	deadly	stormwinds	carried	me.
‘After	this	the	West	Wind	ceased	from	its	stormy	blowing,
and	the	South	Wind	came	swiftly	on,	bringing	to	my	spirit	grief	that	I	must
measure	the	whole	way	back	to	Charybdis.
All	that	night	I	was	carried	along,	and	with	the	sun	rising	430	I	came	to	the
sea	rock	of	Skylla,	and	dreaded	Charybdis.
At	this	time	Charybdis	sucked	down	the	sea's	salt	water,
but	I	reached	high	in	the	air	above	me,	to	where	the	tall	fig	tree	grew,	and
caught	hold	of	it	and	clung	like	a	bat;	there	was	no	place	where	I	could
firmly	brace	my	feet,	or	climb	up	it,	435	for	the	roots	of	it	were	far	from
me,	and	the	branches	hung	out	far,	big	and	long	branches	that
overshadowed	Charybdis.
Inexorably	I	hung	on,	waiting	for	her	to	vomit
the	keel	and	mast	back	up	again.	I	longed	for	them,	and	they	came	late;	at
the	time	when	a	man	leaves	the	law	court,	for	dinner,	440	after	judging	the
many	disputes	brought	him	by	litigious	young	men;	that	was	the	time	it
took	the	timbers	to	appear	from	Charybdis.
Then	I	let	go	my	hold	with	hands	and	feet,	and	dropped	off,	and	came
crashing	down	between	and	missing	the	two	long	timbers,	but	I	mounted
these,	and	with	both	hands	I	paddled	my	way	out.
445	But	the	Father	of	Gods	and	men	did	not	let	Skylla	see	me	again,	or	I	could
not	have	escaped	from	sheer	destruction.
‘From	there	I	was	carried	along	nine	days,	and	on	the	tenth	night
Odysseus	escapes	to	Kalypso's	island
the	gods	brought	me	to	the	island	Ogygia,	home	of	Kalypso	with	the	lovely
hair,	a	dreaded	goddess	who	talks	with	mortals.
450	She	befriended	me	and	took	care	of	me.	Why	tell	the	rest	of	this	story
again,	since	yesterday	in	your	house	I	told	it	to	you	and	your	majestic
wife?	It	is	hateful	to	me
to	tell	a	story	over	again,	when	it	has	been	well	told.’
BOOK	XIII
So	he	spoke,	and	all	of	them	stayed	stricken	to	silence,	held	in	thrall	by	the
story	all	through	the	shadowy	chambers.
Then	Alkinoös	answered	him	in	turn	and	said	to	him:
‘Odysseus,	now	that	you	have	come	to	my	house,	bronze-founded	5	with
the	high	roof,	I	think	you	will	not	lose	your	homecoming,	nor	be	driven
back	from	it	again,	for	all	your	sufferings.
Now	I	lay	this	charge	upon	each	man	of	you,	such	as
here	in	my	palace	drink	the	gleaming	wine	of	the	princes	always	at	my
side,	and	hear	the	song	of	the	singer.
10	Clothing	for	our	guest	is	stored	away	in	the	polished
chest,	and	intricately	wrought	gold,	and	all	those	other	gifts	the	Phaiakian
men	of	counsel	brought	here	to	give	him.
Come,	let	us	man	by	man	each	one	of	us	give	a	great	tripod	and	a	caldron,
and	we	will	make	it	good	to	us	by	a	collection	15	among	the	people.	It	is
hard	for	a	single	man	to	be	generous.’
So	Alkinoös	spoke,	and	his	word	pleased	all	the	rest	of	them.
They	all	went	home	to	go	to	bed,	each	one	to	his	own	house.
But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,	they	came
in	haste	to	the	ship,	and	brought	the	lavish	bronze	with	them,	20	and
Alkinoös,	the	hallowed	prince,	himself	going	on	board,	stowed	it	well
away	under	the	thwarts,	so	it	would	not	hamper	any	of	the	crew	as	they
rowed	with	their	oars	and	sent	the	ship	speedily	on.	Then	all	went	to
Alkinoös'	house	and	made	the	feast	ready.
Alkinoös,	the	hallowed	prince,	sacrificed	an	ox	for	them
Preparations	for	Odysseus'	departure
25	to	Zeus,	dark-clouded	son	of	Kronos,	lord	over	all	men.
They	burned	the	thigh	pieces	and	enjoyed	feasting	on	the	glorious	banquet,
and	among	them	Demodokos,	the	divine	singer,
sang	his	songs	and	was	prized	by	the	people.	But	now	Odysseus	turned	his
head	again	and	again	to	look	at	the	shining
30	sun,	to	hasten	its	going	down,	since	he	was	now	eager
to	go;	and	as	a	man	makes	for	his	dinner,	when	all	day
long	his	wine-colored	oxen	have	dragged	the	compact	plow	for	him	across
the	field,	and	the	sun's	setting	is	welcome	for	bringing	the	time	to	go	to	his
dinner,	and	as	he	goes	his	knees	fail	him;	35	thus	welcome	to	Odysseus
now	was	the	sun	going	under.
Now	he	spoke	aloud	to	the	oar-loving	Phaiakians,
addressing	his	words	to	Alkinoös	beyond	all	others:
‘O	great	Alkinoös,	pre-eminent	among	all	people,
make	libation	and	send	me	upon	my	way	untroubled;
40	and	yourselves	fare	well,	for	all	my	heart	desired	is	now	made	good,
conveyance	and	loving	gifts.	May	the	sky	gods	make	these	prosper	for
me.	May	I	return	to	my	house	and	find	there
a	blameless	wife,	and	all	who	are	dear	to	me	unharmed.	May	you	in	turn,
remaining	here,	bring	comfort	and	cheer	to	your	wedded	45	wives	and
your	children,	and	may	the	gods	grant	success	in	every	endeavor,	and	no
unhappiness	be	found	in	your	people.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	all	approved	his	word	and	encouraged
convoy	for	the	guest,	for	what	he	said	was	fair	and	orderly;	then	the
hallowed	prince	Alkinoös	spoke	to	his	herald:
50	‘Pontonoös,	now	mix	a	bowl	of	wine	and	serve	it
to	all	in	the	palace,	so	that,	with	a	prayer	to	our	father	Zeus,	we	may	send
our	guest	on	his	way,	back	to	his	own	country.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Pontonoös	mixed	the	sweet	wine	and	served	it
to	all,	standing	beside	each	person.	They	poured	a	libation	55	to	all	the
blessed	immortal	gods	who	hold	wide	heaven
from	the	chairs	where	they	were	sitting,	but	great	Odysseus	stood	up	and
put	the	handled	goblet	into	the	hand	of	Arete,
and	spoke	to	her	aloud	and	addressed	her	in	winged	words,	saying:
‘Farewell	to	you,	O	queen,	and	for	all	time,	until	old	age	60	comes	to	you,
and	death,	which	befall	all	human	creatures.
Now	I	am	on	my	way;	but	have	joy	here	in	your	household,	in	your
children	and	your	people,	and	in	your	king,	Alkinoös.’
So	spoke	great	Odysseus,	and	strode	out	over	the	door	sill,
The	Phaiakians	carry	Odysseus	to	Ithaka
and	great	Alkinoös	sent	his	herald	to	go	along	with	him
65	and	show	him	the	way	to	the	fast	ship	and	the	sand	of	the	seashore.
Also	Arete	sent	her	serving	women	with	him.	One
carried	a	mantle,	washed	and	clean,	and	a	tunic.	Another	one	she	sent
along	with	him	to	carry	the	well-made
chest,	and	a	third	went	along	with	them	bearing	food	and	red	wine.
70	But	when	they	had	come	down	to	the	sea,	and	where	the	ship	was,	the
proud	escorts	promptly	took	over	the	gifts,	and	stowed	them	away	in	the
hollow	hull,	and	all	the	food	and	the	drink,	then	spread	out	a	coverlet	for
Odysseus,	and	linen,	out	on
the	deck,	at	the	stern	of	the	ship's	hull,	so	that	he	could	sleep	there	75
undisturbed,	and	he	himself	went	aboard	and	lay	down
silently.	They	sat	down	each	in	his	place	at	the	oarlocks	in	order,	and
slipped	the	cable	free	from	its	hole	in	the	stone	post.
They	bent	to	their	rowing,	and	with	their	oars	tossed	up	the	sea	spray,	and
upon	the	eyes	of	Odysseus	there	fell	a	sleep,	gentle,	80	the	sweetest	kind	of
sleep	with	no	awakening,	most	like
death;	while	the	ship,	as	in	a	field	four	stallions	drawing	a	chariot	all	break
together	at	the	stroke	of	the	whiplash,	and	lifting	high	their	feet	lightly	beat
out	their	path,	so	the	stern	of	this	ship	would	lift	and	the	creaming	wave
behind	her	85	boiled	amain	in	the	thunderous	crash	of	the	sea.	She	ran	on
very	steady	and	never	wavering;	even	the	falcon,
that	hawk	that	flies	lightest	of	winged	creatures,	could	not	have	paced	her,
so	lightly	did	she	run	on	her	way	and	cut	through	the	sea's	waves.
She	carried	a	man	with	a	mind	like	the	gods	for	counsel,	one	whose	90
spirit	up	to	this	time	had	endured	much,	suffering	many
pains:	the	wars	of	men,	hard	crossing	of	the	big	waters;	but	now	he	slept
still,	oblivious	of	all	he	had	suffered.
At	the	time	when	shines	that	brightest	star,	which	beyond	others	comes
with	announcement	of	the	light	of	the	young	Dawn	goddess,	95	then	was
the	time	the	sea-faring	ship	put	in	to	the	island.
There	is	a	harbor	of	the	Old	Man	of	the	Sea,	Phorkys,
in	the	countryside	of	Ithaka.	There	two	precipitous
promontories	opposed	just	out,	to	close	in	the	harbor
and	shelter	it	from	the	big	waves	made	by	the	winds	blowing	100	so	hard
on	the	outside;	inside,	the	well-benched	vessels	can	lie	without	being	tied
up,	once	they	have	found	their	anchorage.
and	leave	him	there	asleep
At	the	head	of	the	harbor,	there	is	an	olive	tree	with	spreading	leaves,	and
nearby	is	a	cave	that	is	shaded,	and	pleasant,	and	sacred	to	the	nymphs	who
are	called	the	Nymphs	of	the	Wellsprings,	105	Naiads.	There	are	mixing
bowls	and	handled	jars	inside	it,	all	of	stone,	and	there	the	bees	deposit
their	honey.
And	therein	also	are	looms	that	are	made	of	stone,	very	long,	where	the
nymphs	weave	their	sea-purple	webs,	a	wonder	to	look	on;	and	there	is
water	forever	flowing.	It	has	two	entrances,	110	one	of	them	facing	the
North	Wind,	where	people	can	enter,	but	the	one	toward	the	South	Wind
has	more	divinity.	That	is	the	way	of	the	immortals,	and	no	men	enter	by
that	way.
It	was	into	this	bay	they	rowed	their	ship.	They	knew	of	it	beforehand.
The	ship,	hard-driven,	ran	up	onto	the	beach	for	as	much	as	115	half	her
length,	such	was	the	force	the	hands	of	the	oarsmen	gave	her.	They	stepped
from	the	strong-benched	ship	out	onto	the	dry	land,	and	first	they	lifted	and
carried	Odysseus	out	of	the	hollow	hull,	along	with	his	bed	linen	and
shining	coverlet,
and	set	him	down	on	the	sand.	He	was	still	bound	fast	in	sleep.	Then	120
they	lifted	and	carried	out	the	possessions,	those	which	the	haughty
Phaiakians,	urged	by	great-hearted	Athene,	had	given	him,	as	he	set	out	for
home,	and	laid	them	next	to	the	trunk	of	the	olive,	all	in	a	pile	and	away
from	the	road,	lest	some	wayfarer	might	come	before	Odysseus	awoke,	and
spoil	his	possessions.
125	Then	they	themselves	turned	back	toward	home.	But	the	Earthshaker	had
not	forgotten	those	threats	he	had	once	uttered	at	godlike	Odysseus	in	the
beginning,	and	he	asked	Zeus	for	counsel:	‘Father	Zeus,	no	longer	among
the	gods	immortal
shall	I	be	honored,	when	there	are	mortals	who	do	me	no	honor,	130	the
Phaiakians,	and	yet	these	are	of	my	own	blood.	See	now,	I	had	said	to
myself	Odysseus	would	come	home	only	after	much	suffering.	I	had	not
indeed	taken	his	homecoming
altogether	away,	since	first	you	nodded	your	head	and	assented	to	it.	But
they	carried	him,	asleep	in	the	fast	ship,	over	135	the	sea,	and	set	him
down	in	Ithaka,	and	gave	him	numberless	gifts,	as	bronze,	and	gold
abundant,	and	woven	clothing,	more	than	Odysseus	could	ever	have	taken
from	Troy,	even	if	he	had	come	home	ungrieved	and	with	his	fair	share	of
the	plunder.’
Then	in	turn	Zeus	who	gathers	the	clouds	made	answer:
Poseidon	turns	their	ship	to	stone
140	‘What	a	thing	to	have	said,	Earthshaker	of	the	wide	strength.
The	gods	do	not	hold	you	in	dishonor.	It	would	be	a	hard	thing	if	we	were
to	put	any	slight	on	the	eldest	and	best	among	us.
But	if	there	is	any	man	who,	giving	way	to	the	violence
and	force	in	him,	slights	you,	it	will	be	yours	to	punish	him.
145	Now	and	always.	Do	as	you	will	and	as	it	pleases	you.’
Then	in	turn	Poseidon	shaker	of	the	earth	made	answer:
‘I	would	act	quickly,	dark-clouded	one,	as	you	advise	me,	but	always	I
have	respect	for	your	anger,	and	keep	out	of	its	way.	This	time,	I	wish	to
stun	that	beautiful	vessel	150	of	the	Phaiakians	out	on	the	misty	sea	as	it
comes	back	from	its	journey,	so	that	they	may	stop,	and	give	over
conveying	people.	And	I	would	hide	their	city	under	a	mountain.’
Then	in	turn	Zeus	who	gathers	the	clouds	made	answer:
‘Good	brother,	here	is	the	way	it	seems	to	my	mind	best
155	to	do.	When	all	the	people	are	watching	her	from	the	city	as	she	comes	in,
then	turn	her	into	a	rock	that	looks	like	a	fast	ship,	close	off	shore,	so	that
all	people	may	wonder	at	her.	But	do	not	hide	their	city	under	a
mountain.’
When	the	shaker	of	the	earth	Poseidon	heard	him,	he	went	off
160	striding	to	Scheria,	where	the	Phaiakians	are	born	and	live.	There	he
waited,	and	the	sea-going	ship	came	close	in,	lightly	pursuing	her	way,
and	the	Earthshaker	came	close	up	to	her,	and	turned	her	into	stone	and
rooted	her	there	to	the	bottom	with	a	flat	stroke	of	his	hand.	And	then	he
went	away	from	her.
165
The	Phaiakians	of	the	long	oars,	the	sea-famed	people,	now	began
talking	to	each	other	and	spoke	in	winged	words;	and	thus	they	would
speak,	each	looking	at	the	man	next	to	him:	‘Ah	me,	who	was	it	fastened
our	swift	ship	in	the	water
as	she	came	rowing	in	for	home?	Just	now	she	could	be	seen	plainly.’
170	Thus	one	or	another	spoke	but	they	did	not	know	what	had	happened.	To
them	now	Alkinoös	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them:	‘Ah	now,	the
prophecy	of	old	is	come	to	completion,
that	my	father	spoke,	when	he	said	Poseidon	someday	would	be	angry	with
us,	because	we	are	convoy	without	hurt	to	all	men.
175	He	said	that	one	day,	as	a	well-made	ship	of	Phaiakian
men	came	back	from	a	convoy	on	the	misty	face	of	the	water,	he	would
stun	it,	and	pile	a	great	mountain	over	our	city,	to	hide	it.
So	the	old	man	spoke.	Now	all	is	being	accomplished.
Odysseus'	wakening
Come	then,	let	us	do	as	I	say,	let	us	all	be	won	over.
180	Stop	our	conveying	of	every	mortal	who	makes	his	arrival	here	at	our	city.
We	must	dedicate	also	to	Poseidon
twelve	bulls,	chosen	out	of	the	herds.	Then	he	might	take	pity	on	us,	and
not	pile	up	a	high	mountain	over	our	city.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	were	afraid	and	made	the	bulls	ready.
185	So	these	leaders	of	the	Phaiakians	and	men	of	counsel
among	their	people	made	their	prayer	to	the	lord	Poseidon,	standing	around
the	altar.	But	now	great	Odysseus	wakened	from	sleep	in	his	own
fatherland,	and	he	did	not	know	it,	having	been	long	away,	for	the	goddess,
Pallas	Athene,
190	daughter	of	Zeus,	poured	a	mist	over	all,	so	she	could	make	him
unrecognizable	and	explain	all	the	details	to	him,
to	have	his	wife	not	recognize	him,	nor	his	townspeople
and	friends,	till	he	punished	the	suitors	for	their	overbearing	oppression.
Therefore	to	the	lord	Odysseus	she	made	everything	look	otherwise	195
than	it	was,	the	penetrating	roads,	the	harbors	where	all	could	anchor,	the
rocks	going	straight	up,	and	the	trees	tall	growing.
He	sprang	and	stood	upright	and	looked	about	at	his	native	country,	and
groaned	aloud	and	struck	himself	on	both	thighs	with	the	flats	of	his	hands,
and	spoke	a	word	of	lamentation:	200	‘Ah	me,	what	are	the	people	whose
land	I	have	come	to	this	time,	and	are	they	savage	and	violent,	and	without
justice,
or	hospitable	to	strangers	and	with	minds	that	are	godly?
And	where	shall	I	take	all	these	many	goods?	Where	shall	I	myself	be
driven?	I	wish	I	had	stayed	among	the	Phaiakians,	205	just	where	I	was,
and	I	would	have	visited	some	other	powerful	king,	who	then	would	have
been	my	friend	and	seen	to	my	journey.
Now	I	do	not	know	where	to	put	all	this,	and	I	cannot
leave	it	here,	for	fear	it	may	become	spoil	for	others.
Shame	on	the	leaders	of	the	Phaiakians	and	their	men	of	counsel,	210	for
they	were	not	altogether	thoughtful,	nor	were	they	righteous,	when	they
took	me	away	here	to	another	land;	but	they	told	me	they	would	bring	me
to	sunny	Ithaka,	and	they	did	not	do	it.
May	Zeus	of	the	suppliants	punish	them,	for	he	oversees	other	men
besides,	and	punishes	anyone	who	transgresses.
215	But	come,	let	me	count	my	goods	and	find	out	whether	they	might	not
have	gone	taking	some	of	it	with	them	in	the	hollow	vessel.’
So	speaking,	he	counted	up	the	surpassingly	beautiful	tripods
Athene	disguised	tells	him	where	he	is
and	caldrons,	and	the	gold	and	all	the	fine	woven	clothing.
There	was	nothing	gone	from	all	of	this;	but	he	in	great	sorrow	220	crept
over	the	beach	of	his	own	country	beside	the	resounding	sea,	with	much
lamentation;	but	now	Athene	came	near	him,	likening	herself	in	form	to	a
young	man,	a	herdsman
of	sheep,	a	delicate	boy,	such	as	the	children	of	kings	are,	and	wearing	a
well-wrought	shawl	in	a	double	fold	over	her	shoulders.
225	Under	her	shining	feet	she	had	sandals,	and	in	her	hand	carried	a	spear.
Odysseus,	in	joy	at	the	sight,	came	up	to	meet	her,	and	spoke	aloud	to	her
and	addressed	her	in	winged	words,	saying:	‘Dear	friend,	since	you	are	the
first	I	have	met	with	in	this	country,	I	give	you	greeting.	Do	not	cross	me
with	evil	purpose,
230	but	rescue	these	possessions	and	me.	I	make	my	prayer	to	you	as	to	a	god,
and	come	to	your	dear	knees	as	a	suppliant.
And	tell	me	this	and	tell	me	truly,	so	that	I	may	know	it.
What	land	is	this,	what	neighborhood	is	it,	what	people	live	here?
Is	it	some	one	of	the	sunny	islands,	or	is	it	some	foreland	235	slanted	out
from	the	generous	mainland	into	the	salt	sea?’
Then	in	turn	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	answered:
‘You	are	some	innocent,	O	stranger,	or	else	you	have	come	from	far	away,
if	you	ask	about	this	land,	for	it	is	not
so	nameless	as	all	that.	There	are	indeed	many	who	know	it,	240	whether
among	those	who	live	toward	the	east	and	the	sunrise,	or	those	who	live	up
and	away	toward	the	mist	and	darkness.	See	now,	this	is	a	rugged	country
and	not	for	the	driving	of	horses,	but	neither	is	it	so	unpleasant,	though	not
widely	shapen;	for	there	is	abundant	grain	for	bread	grown	here,	it
produces	245	wine,	and	there	is	always	rain	and	the	dew	to	make	it
fertile;	it	is	good	to	feed	goats	and	cattle;	and	timber	is	there	of	all	sorts,
and	watering	places	good	through	the	seasons;	so	that,	stranger,	the	name
of	Ithaka	has	gone	even
to	Troy,	though	they	say	that	is	very	far	from	Achaian	country.’
250	So	she	spoke,	and	resourceful	great	Odysseus	was	happy,	rejoicing	in	the
land	of	his	fathers	when	Pallas	Athene	daughter	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis	told
him	the	truth	of	it,
and	so	he	answered	her	again	and	addressed	her	in	winged	words;	but	he
did	not	tell	her	the	truth,	but	checked	that	word	from	the	outset,	255
forever	using	to	every	advantage	the	mind	that	was	in	him:	‘I	heard	the
name	of	Ithaka	when	I	was	in	wide	Crete,
He	lies	to	her
far	away,	across	the	sea;	now	I	myself	have	come	here
with	these	goods	that	you	see,	but	leaving	as	much	again	to	my	children.
I	have	fled,	an	exile,	because	I	killed	the	son	of	Idomeneus,	260
Orsilochos
,	a	man	swift	of	foot,	who	in	wide	Crete	surpassed	all	other
mortal	men	for	speed	of	his	feet.	I	killed	him	because	he	tried	to	deprive
me	of	all	my	share	of	the	plunder	from	Troy,	and	for	the	sake	of	it	my	heart
suffered	many	pains:	the	wars	of	men;	hard	crossing	of	the	big	waters;	265
for	I	would	not	do	his	father	favor,	and	serve	as	his	henchman	in	the	land
of	Troy,	but	I	led	others,	of	my	own	following.
I	lay	in	wait	for	him	with	a	friend	by	the	road,	and	struck	him	with	the
bronze-headed	spear	as	he	came	back	from	the	fields.	There	was	a	very
dark	night	spread	over	all	the	sky,	nor	did	anyone	270	see	me,	nor	did
anyone	know	of	it	when	I	stripped	the	life	from	him.	But	then,	when	I	had
cut	him	down	with	the	sharp	bronze,	I	went	at	once	to	a	ship,	and
supplicated	the	lordly
Phoenician	men,	and	gave	them	spoil,	to	stay	their	eagerness,	and	asked
them	to	carry	me	and	to	set	me	down	in	Pylos
275	or	shining	Elis	where	the	
Epeians
	are	lords;	but	it	happened	that	the	force
of	the	wind	beat	them	away	from	those	places,	greatly	against	their	will;	it
was	not	as	if	they	wished	to	deceive	me.
So,	driven	off	those	courses,	we	came	in	here,	by	night,	and	rowed	her
hastily	into	the	harbor,	nor	was	there	any	280	thought	in	us	of	the	evening
meal,	much	though	we	wanted	it,	but	all	of	us	came	off	the	ship	as	we
were,	and	lay	down;	then,	weary	as	I	was,	the	sweetness	of	sleep	came
upon	me,	while	they,	taking	all	the	possessions	out	of	the	hollow	hull,	set
them	ashore	on	the	sand,	and	close	to	the	place	where	I	was	lying,	285	and
they,	embarking,	went	on	their	way	to	strongly	settled	
Sidon
;	but	I,
grieving	at	the	heart,	was	left	behind	here.’
So	he	spoke.	The	goddess,	gray-eyed	Athene,	smiled	on	him,
and	stroked	him	with	her	hand,	and	took	on	the	shape	of	a	woman	both
beautiful	and	tall,	and	well	versed	in	glorious	handiworks,	290	and	spoke
aloud	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words,	saying:	‘It	would	be	a
sharp	one,	and	a	stealthy	one,	who	would	ever	get	past	you	in	any
contriving;	even	if	it	were	a	god	against	you.
You	wretch,	so	devious,	never	weary	of	tricks,	then	you	would	not	even	in
your	own	country	give	over	your	ways	of	deceiving	295	and	your	thievish
tales.	They	are	near	to	you	in	your	very	nature.
Athene	reveals	herself
But	come,	let	us	talk	no	more	of	this,	for	you	and	I	both	know	sharp
practice,	since	you	are	far	the	best	of	all	mortal	men	for	counsel	and
stories,	and	I	among	all	the	divinities	am	famous	for	wit	and	sharpness;	and
yet	you	never	recognized	300	Pallas	Athene,	daughter	of	Zeus,	the	one
who	is	always
standing	beside	you	and	guarding	you	in	every	endeavor.
And	it	was	I	who	made	you	loved	by	all	the	Phaiakians.
And	now	again	I	am	here,	to	help	you	in	your	devising
of	schemes,	and	to	hide	the	possessions	which	the	haughty	Phaiakians	305
bestowed—it	was	by	my	thought	and	counsel—on	you,	as	you	started	for
home,	and	tell	you	all	the	troubles	you	are	destined	to	suffer	in	your	well-
wrought	house;	but	you	must,	of	necessity,	endure	all,	and	tell	no	one	out
of	all	the	men	and	the	women
that	you	have	come	back	from	your	wanderings,	but	you	must	endure	310
much	grief	in	silence,	standing	and	facing	men	in	their	violence.’
Then	in	turn	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	to	her	in	answer:
‘It	is	hard,	O	goddess,	for	even	a	man	of	good	understanding	to	recognize
you	on	meeting,	for	you	take	every	shape	upon	you.
But	this	I	know	well:	there	was	a	time	when	you	were	kind	to	me	315	in
the	days	when	we	sons	of	the	Achaians	were	fighting	in	Troy	land.
But	after	we	had	sacked	the	sheer	citadel	of	Priam,
and	went	away	in	our	ships,	and	the	god	scattered	the	Achaians,	I	never
saw	you,	daughter	of	Zeus,	after	that,	nor	did	I	know	of	your	visiting	my
ship,	to	beat	off	some	trouble
320	from	me,	but	always	with	my	heart	torn	inside	its	coverings	I	wandered,
until	the	gods	set	me	free	from	unhappiness,	until	in	the	rich	territory	of
the	Phaiakian	men	you	cheered	me	with	words,	then	led	me,	yourself	in
person,	into	their	city.
And	now	I	entreat	you	in	the	name	of	your	father;	for	I	do	not	think	325	I
have	really	come	into	sunny	Ithaka,	but	have	been	driven	off	course	to
another	country,	and	I	think	you	are	teasing	me	when	you	tell	me	I	am,	and
saying	it	to	beguile	me;	tell	me	if	it	is	true	that	I	have	come	back	to	my
own	dear	country.’
Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	answered	him:
330	‘Always	you	are	the	same,	and	such	is	the	mind	within	you,	and	so	I
cannot	abandon	you	when	you	are	unhappy,
because	you	are	fluent,	and	reason	closely,	and	keep	your	head	always.
Anyone	else	come	home	from	wandering	would	have	run	happily	off	to	see
his	children	and	wife	in	his	halls;	but	it	is	not
and	explains	her	absences
335	your	pleasure	to	investigate	and	ask	questions,	not	till	you	have	made	trial
of	your	wife;	yet	she,	as	always,
sits	there	in	your	palace,	and	always	with	her	the	wretched	nights,	and	the
days	also,	waste	her	away	with	weeping.
And	I	never	did	have	any	doubt,	but	in	my	heart	always
340	knew	how	you	would	come	home,	having	lost	all	of	your	companions.
But,	you	see,	I	did	not	want	to	fight	with	my	father's
brother,	Poseidon,	who	was	holding	a	grudge	against	you
in	his	heart,	and	because	you	blinded	his	dear	son,	hated	you.
Come,	I	will	show	you	settled	Ithaka,	so	you	will	believe	me.
345	This	is	the	harbor	of	the	Old	Man	of	the	Sea,	
Phorkys
,	and	here	at	the
head	of	the	harbor	is	the	olive	tree	with	spreading	leaves,	and	nearby	is	the
cave	that	is	shaded,	and	pleasant,	and	sacred	to	the	nymphs	who	are	called
the	Nymphs	of	the	Wellsprings,	Naiads.	That	is	the	wide	over-arching
cave,	where	often
350	you	used	to	accomplish	for	the	nymphs	their	complete	hecatombs;	and
there	is	the	mountain,	Neritos,	all	covered	with	forest.’
So	speaking	the	goddess	scattered	the	mist,	and	the	land	was	visible.
Long-suffering	great	Odysseus	was	gladdened	then,	rejoicing	in	the	sight
of	his	country,	and	kissed	the	grain-giving	ground,	then	355	raised	his
hands	in	the	air	and	spoke	to	the	nymphs,	praying:	‘Naiad	nymphs,	O
daughters	of	Zeus,	I	never	suspected
that	I	would	see	you	again.	Be	welcome	now	to	my	gentle
prayers,	but	I	will	also	give	you	gifts,	as	I	used	to
before,	if	Athene	the	Spoiler,	Zeus'	daughter,	freely	grants	me	360	to	go	on
living	here	myself,	and	sustains	my	dear	son.’
Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	said	to	him:
‘Never	fear,	let	none	of	these	matters	trouble	your	mind.	Rather	let	us	hide
these	possessions	without	delay,	deep	in	the	inward	part	of	the	wonderful
cave,	so	they	will	be	kept	safe	for	you.
365	Then	we	shall	make	our	plans	how	all	may	come	out	best	for	us.’
So	the	goddess	spoke,	and	went	inside	the	shadowy
cave,	looking	through	it	for	hiding	places.	Meanwhile,	Odysseus	brought
everything	close	up,	gold,	tireless	bronze,	clothing	that	had	been	made	with
care,	given	him	by	the	Phaiakians,	370	and	stowed	it	well	away	inside;	and
Pallas	Athene,
daughter	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis,	set	a	stone	against	the	doorway.
The	two	sat	down	against	the	trunk	of	the	hallowed	olive,
Information	and	instructions
and	plotted	out	the	destruction	of	the	overmastering	suitors.
Their	discourse	was	begun	by	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene:	375	‘Son	of
Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,	consider	how	you	can	lay
your	hands	on	these	shameless	suitors,	who	for	three	years	now	have	been
as	lords	in	your	palace,	and	courting	your	godlike	wife,	and	offering	gifts
to	win	her.
And	she,	though	her	heart	forever	grieves	over	your	homecoming,	380
holds	out	some	hope	for	all,	and	makes	promises	to	each	man,	sending
them	messages,	but	her	mind	has	other	intentions.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
‘Surely	I	was	on	the	point	of	perishing	by	an	evil
fate	in	my	palace,	like	Atreus'	son	Agamemnon,	unless
385	you	had	told	me,	goddess,	the	very	truth	of	all	that	has	happened.
Come	then,	weave	the	design,	the	way	I	shall	take	my	vengeance	upon
them;	stand	beside	me,	inspire	me	with	strength	and	courage,	as	when
together	we	brought	down	Troy's	shining	coronal.
For	if	in	your	fury,	O	gray-eyed	goddess,	you	stood	beside	me,	390	I	would
fight,	lady	and	goddess,	with	your	help	against	three	hundred	men	if	you,
freely	and	in	full	heart,	would	help	me.’
Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	answered:
‘I	will	indeed	be	at	your	side,	you	will	not	be	forgotten	at	the	time	when	we
two	go	to	this	work,	and	I	look	for	endless	395	ground	to	be	spattered	by
the	blood	and	brains	of	the	suitors,	these	men	who	are	eating	all	your
substance	away.	But	come	now,	let	me	make	you	so	that	no	mortal	can
recognize	you.
For	I	will	wither	the	handsome	flesh	that	is	on	your	flexible	limbs,	and	ruin
the	brown	hair	on	your	head,	and	about	you	400	put	on	such	a	clout	of
cloth	any	man	will	loathe	when	he	sees	you	wearing	it;	I	will	dim	those
eyes,	that	have	been	so	handsome,	so	you	will	be	unprepossessing	to	all	the
suitors
and	your	wife	and	child,	those	whom	you	left	behind	in	your	palace.
First	of	all,	you	are	to	make	your	way	to	the	swineherd
405	who	is	in	charge	of	your	pigs,	but	always	his	thoughts	are	kindly,	and	he
is	a	friend	to	your	son	and	to	circumspect	Penelope.
You	will	find	him	posted	beside	his	pigs,	and	these	are	herded	near	the
Rock	of	the	Raven	and	beside	the	spring	
Arethousa
,	to	eat	the	acorns	that
stay	their	strength,	and	drink	of	the	darkling	410	water,	for	these	are
nourishing	for	pigs,	and	fatten	them.
There	you	shall	wait,	and	stay	with	him,	and	ask	him	all	questions,
Odysseus	transformed	into	an	old	tramp
while	I	go	over	to	Sparta,	the	country	of	lovely	women,
and	call	back	Telemachos,	your	own	dear	son,	Odysseus,
who	went	into	spacious	Lakedaimon	to	see	Menelaos
415	and	ask	him	for	news	of	you,	and	whether	you	were	still	living.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
‘Why	then	did	you	not	tell	him,	since	in	your	mind	you	know	all	things?
Was	it	so	that	he	too	wandering	over	the	barren
sea	should	suffer	pains,	while	others	ate	up	his	substance?’
420	Then	in	turn	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	answered:
‘Let	him	not	be	too	much	on	your	mind.	It	was	I	myself
who	saw	him	along	on	that	journey,	so	he	would	win	reputation	by	going
there,	and	he	has	no	hardship,	but	now	is	staying	at	his	ease	with	the	son	of
Atreus,	and	all	abundance	is	by	him.
425	It	is	true	that	the	young	men	with	their	black	ship	are	lying	in	wait	for	him
to	kill	him	before	he	reaches	his	country;	but	I	think	this	will	not	happen,
but	that	sooner	the	earth	will	cover	some	one	of	those	suitors,	who	now
are	eating	away	your	substance.'
So	spoke	Athene,	and	with	her	wand	she	tapped	Odysseus,
430	and	withered	the	handsome	flesh	that	was	upon	his	flexible	limbs,	and
ruined	the	brown	hair	on	his	head,	and	about	him,	to	cover	all	his	body,
she	put	the	skin	of	an	ancient
old	man,	and	then	she	dimmed	those	eyes	that	had	been	so	handsome.
Then	she	put	another	vile	rag	on	him,	and	a	tunic,
435	tattered,	squalid,	blackened	with	the	foul	smoke,	and	over	it	gave	him	the
big	hide	of	a	fast-running	deer,	with	the	hairs	rubbed	off,	to	wear,	and	she
gave	him	a	staff,	and	an	ugly	wallet	that	was	full	of	holes,	with	a	twist	of
rope	attached,	to	dangle	it.
So	they	two	consulted	and	went	their	ways.	The	goddess
440	went	to	bright	Lakedaimon	to	fetch	the	son	of	Odysseus.
BOOK	XIV
But	Odysseus	himself	left	the	harbor	and	ascended	a	rugged
path,	through	wooded	country	along	the	heights,	where	Athene
had	indicated	the	noble	swineherd,	who	beyond	others
cared	for	the	house	properties	acquired	by	noble	Odysseus.
5	He	found	him	sitting	in	front,	on	the	porch,	where	the	lofty	enclosure	had
been	built,	in	a	place	with	a	view	on	all	sides,	both	large	and	handsome,
cleared	all	about,	and	it	was	the	swineherd	himself	who	had	built	it,	to
hold	the	pigs	of	his	absent	master,
far	from	his	mistress	and	from	aged	Laertes.	He	made	it
10	with	stones	from	the	field,	and	topped	it	off	with	shrubbery.	Outside	he	had
driven	posts	in	a	full	circle,	to	close	it	on	all	sides,	set	close	together	and
thick,	the	dark	of	the	oak,	split	out	from	the	logs.	Inside	the	enclosure	he
made	twelve	pig	pens
next	to	each	other,	for	his	sows	to	sleep	in,	and	in	each	of	them
15	fifty	pigs	who	sleep	on	the	ground	were	confined.	These	were	the	breeding
females,	but	the	males	lay	outside,	and	these	were	fewer	by	far,	for	the
godlike	suitors	kept	diminishing	their	numbers	by	eating	them,	since	the
swineherd	kept	having
to	send	them	in	the	best	of	all	the	well-fattened	porkers
20	at	any	time.	Now,	they	numbered	three	hundred	and	sixty,	and	four	dogs,
who	were	like	wild	beasts,	forever	were	lying	by	them.	These	the
swineherd,	leader	of	men,	had	raised	up	himself.	Now	he	was	fitting
sandals	to	his	feet,	cutting
out	a	well-colored	piece	of	oxhide.	Meanwhile,	the	other
Odysseus	finds	Eumaios	the	swineherd
25	swineherds	were	out	with	the	herded	pigs	one	place	or	another,	three	of
them,	but	the	fourth	he	had	sent	off	to	the	city	to	take	a	pig	to	the	insolent
suitors,	since	they	so	forced	him,	so	they	could	sacrifice	it	and	glut	their
appetites	on	it.
Suddenly	the	wild-baying	dogs	caught	sight	of	Odysseus.
30	They	ran	at	him	with	a	great	outcry,	and	Odysseus	prudently	sat	down	on
the	ground,	and	the	staff	fell	out	of	his	hand.	But	there,	beside	his	own
steading,	he	might	have	endured	a	shameful	mauling,	but	the	swineherd,
quick	and	light	on	his	feet,	came	hurrying	to	him
across	the	porch,	and	let	fall	from	his	hand	the	shoe	he	was	holding.
35	He	shouted	at	the	dogs	and	scared	them	in	every	direction	with	volleyed
showers	of	stones,	and	spoke	then	to	his	own	master:	‘Old	sir,	the	dogs
were	suddenly	on	you	and	would	have	savaged	you	badly;	so	you	would
have	covered	me	with	shame,	but	already
there	are	other	pains	and	sorrows	the	gods	have	bestowed	upon	me.
40	For	here	I	sit,	mourning	and	grieving	away	for	a	godlike	master,	and
carefully	raise	his	fattened	pigs	for	others	to	eat,	while	he,	in	need	of
finding	some	sustenance,	wanders	some	city	or	countryside	of	alien-
speaking	people;
if	he	still	is	alive	somewhere	and	looks	on	the	sunlight.
45	Come,	old	sir,	along	to	my	shelter,	so	that	you	also	first	may	be	filled	to
contentment	with	food	and	wine,	then	tell	me	where	you	come	from,	and
about	the	sorrows	you	have	been	suffering.’
So	spoke	the	noble	swineherd	and	led	the	way	to	the	shelter,
and	brought	him	in,	and	seated	him	on	brushwood	piled	up
50	beneath,	and	spread	over	this	the	hide	of	a	hairy	wild	goat	from	his	own
bed.	This	was	great	and	thick,	and	Odysseus	was	happy	at	how	he
received	him,	and	spoke	a	word	and	named	him,	saying:	‘May	Zeus,
stranger,	and	the	other	gods	everlasting	grant	you
all	you	desire	the	most,	for	you	have	received	me	heartily.’
55	Then,	O	swineherd	
Eumaios
,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘Stranger,	I	have
no	right	to	deny	the	stranger,	not	even	if	one	came	to	me	who	was	meaner
than	you.	All	vagabonds	and	strangers	are	under	Zeus,	and	the	gift	is	a
light	and	a	dear	one
that	comes	from	us,	for	that	is	the	way	of	us	who	are	servants
60	and	forever	filled	with	fear	when	they	come	under	power	of	masters	who
are	new.	The	gods	have	stopped	the	homeward	voyage	of	that	one	who
cared	greatly	for	me,	and	granted	me	such	possessions	as	a	good-natured
lord	grants	to	the	thrall	of	his	house;	a	home
Hospitality	of	Eumaios
of	his	own,	and	a	plot	of	land,	and	a	wife	much	sought	after,
65	when	the	man	accomplishes	much	work	and	god	speeds	the	labor	as	he	has
sped	for	me	this	labor	to	which	I	am	given.	So	my	lord	would	have	done
much	for	me	if	he	had	grown	old	here,	but	he	perished,	as	I	wish	Helen's
seed	could	all	have	perished,
pitched	away,	for	she	has	unstrung	the	knees	of	so	many
70	men;	for	in	Agamemnon's	cause	my	master	went	also	to	Ilion,	land	of	good
horses,	there	to	fight	with	the	Trojans.’
He	spoke,	and	pulled	his	tunic	to	with	his	belt,	and	went	out	swiftly	to
his	pig	pens	where	his	herds	of	swine	were	penned	in,	and	picked	out	a	pair
and	brought	them	in	and	sacrificed	them,
75	and	singed	them,	and	cut	them	into	little	pieces,	and	spitted	them,	then
roasted	all	and	brought	and	set	it	before	Odysseus	hot	on	the	spits	as	it
was,	and	sprinkled	white	barley	over	it,	and	mixed	the	wine,	as	sweet	as
honey,	in	a	bowl	of	ivy,
and	himself	sat	down	facing	him,	and	urged	him	on,	saying:
80	‘Eat	now,	stranger,	what	we	serving	men	are	permitted	to	eat:	young	pigs,
but	the	fattened	swine	are	devoured	by	the	suitors,	who	have	no	regard	for
anyone	in	their	minds,	no	pity.
The	blessed	gods	have	no	love	for	a	pitiless	action,
but	rather	they	reward	justice	and	what	men	do	that	is	lawful;
85	and	though	those	are	hateful	and	lawless	men	who	land	on	an	alien	shore,
and	Zeus	grants	them	spoil	and	plunder,	when	they	have	loaded	their	ships
with	it	they	set	sail	away	for	home,	for	even	in	the	minds	of	these	there	is
stored	some	fear,	which	is	stronger	than
on	these	there	falls	strong	fear	of	how	they	may	be	regarded.
But	the	suitors,	you	see,	have	heard	some	godsent	rumor,	and	they	know
90	about	the	dismal	death	of	our	man,	and	they	will	not	decently	make	their
suit,	nor	go	home	to	their	own	houses,	but	at	their	ease	they	forcibly	eat	up
his	property,	and	spare	nothing.
For	as	many	as	are	the	nights	and	the	days	from	Zeus,	on	not	one
of	these	do	they	dedicate	only	a	single	victim,	nor	only
95	two,	and	they	violently	draw	the	wine	and	waste	it.	See	now,	he	had	an
endlessly	abundant	livelihood.	Not	one	of	the	heroes	over	on	the	black
mainland	had	so	much,	no	one	here	on	Ithaka,	no	twenty	men	together	had
such
quantity	of	substance	as	he.	I	will	count	it	for	you.
100	Twelve	herds	of	cattle	on	the	mainland.	As	many	sheepflocks.	As	many
troops	of	pigs	and	again	as	many	wide	goatflocks,
and	his	loyalty	to	Odysseus
and	friends	over	there,	and	his	own	herdsmen,	pasture	them	for	him.
And	here	again,	at	the	end	of	the	island,	eleven	wide	flocks
of	goats	in	all	are	pastured,	good	men	have	these	in	their	keeping.
105	And	day	by	day	each	of	these	people	brings	in	for	the	suitors	a	sheep,	and
each	brings	in	the	fatted	goat	that	seems	finest,	and	I	myself	keep	watch
on	these	pigs	and	guard	them,	and	I	too
choose	with	care	the	best	of	the	pigs,	and	send	it	off	to	them.’
He	spoke,	and	the	other	ate	his	meat	and	drank	his	wine,	quietly,
110	greedily	and	without	speaking,	and	devised	evils	for	the	suitors;	but	when
he	had	dined,	and	filled	his	desire	with	food,	the	other	filled	the	cup	in
which	he	was	drinking	and	handed	it	to	him,
all	filled	with	wine,	and	he	received	it,	and	his	heart	was	cheered
and	he	spoke	to	him	then	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words,	saying:
115	‘Dear	friend,	who	is	the	man	who	bought	you	with	his	possessions	and	is
so	rich	and	powerful	as	you	tell	me?	You	say	he	was	one	who	perished	in
Agamemnon's	cause.	Then	tell	me,
and	perhaps	I	might	know	him	if	he	was	such	a	man,	for	Zeus	knows
as	do	the	other	immortal	gods,	if	I	might	have	seen	him
120	and	have	some	report	to	give	you.	I	have	wandered	to	many	places.’
Then	the	swineherd,	leader	of	men,	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘Old	sir,
there	is	none	who	could	come	here,	bringing	a	report	of	him,	and	persuade
his	wife	and	his	dear	son;	and	yet
there	are	vain	and	vagabond	men	in	need	of	sustenance
125	who	tell	lies,	and	are	unwilling	to	give	a	true	story;	and	any	vagrant	who
makes	his	way	to	the	land	of	Ithaka	goes	to	my	mistress	and	babbles	his
lies	to	her,	and	she	then
receives	him	well	and	entertains	him	and	asks	him	everything,
and	as	she	mourns	him	the	tears	run	down	from	her	eyes,	since	this	is
130	the	right	way	for	a	wife	when	her	husband	is	far	and	perished.	So	you	too,
old	sir,	might	spin	out	a	well-made	story,	if	someone	would	give	you	a
cloak	or	tunic	to	wear	for	it.	But,	for
him,	the	dogs	and	the	flying	birds	must	by	now	have	worried
the	skin	away	from	his	bones,	and	the	soul	has	left	them;	or	else
135	the	fish	have	eaten	him,	out	in	the	great	sea,	and	his	bones	lie	now	on	the
mainland	shore	with	the	sand	piled	deeply	upon	them.
So	he	has	perished	there,	and	sorrows	are	made	for	his	dear	ones
all	hereafter,	and	me	most	of	all,	for	never	again	now
will	I	find	again	a	lord	as	kind	as	he,	wherever
140	I	go;	even	if	I	could	come	back	to	my	father	and	mother's
Asked	who	he	is,	Odysseus
house,	where	first	I	was	born,	and	they	raised	me	when	I	was	little.	But	I
do	not	so	much	mourn	for	this,	much	though	my	longing	is	to	behold	them
with	these	eyes	and	in	my	own	country,
but	the	longing	is	on	me	for	Odysseus,	and	he	is	gone	from	me;
145	and	even	when	he	is	not	here,	my	friend,	I	feel	some	modesty	about
naming	him,	for	in	his	heart	he	cared	for	me	greatly	and	loved	me.	So	I
call	him	my	master,	though	he	is	absent.’
Then	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	spoke	to	him	in	answer:
‘Dear	friend,	since	you	are	altogether	full	of	denial,
150	you	do	not	think	he	will	come,	and	your	heart	is	ever	untrusting;	but	I	will
not	speak	in	the	same	manner,	but	on	my	oath	tell	you	Odysseus	is	on	his
way	home.	Let	me	have	my	reward	for	good	news
then,	as	soon	as	he	is	come	back	and	enters	his	own	house.
Give	me	fine	clothing,	a	cloak	and	tunic	to	wear.	Before	that,
155	much	as	I	stand	in	need	of	these,	I	will	not	accept	them.	For	as	I	detest	the
doorways	of	Death	I	detest	that	man	who	under	constraint	of	poverty
babbles	beguiling	falsehoods.
Zeus	be	my	witness,	first	of	the	gods,	and	the	table	of	friendship,
and	the	hearth	of	blameless	Odysseus,	to	which	I	come	as	a	suppliant,
160	all	these	things	are	being	accomplished	in	the	way	I	tell	them.	Sometime
within	this	very	year	Odysseus	will	be	here.
Either	at	the	waning	of	the	moon,	or	at	its	onset,
he	will	come	home	and	take	his	vengeance	here	upon	any
who	deprives	his	wife	and	his	glorious	son	of	their	due	honor.’
165	Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘Old	sir,	I	will
never	pay	you	that	gift	for	good	news,	nor	will	Odysseus	come	to	this
house	again.	Be	easy	and	drink	your	wine.	We	will	think	of	other	matters.
Do	not	then
keep	on	reminding	me	of	this,	for	the	heart	within	me
170	grieves	whenever	anyone	speaks	of	my	gracious	master.	So	we	will	let
your	oath	alone,	but	I	hope	that	Odysseus	will	come	back,	as	I	wish,	and
as	Penelope	wishes,
and	Laertes	the	old	man	too,	and	godlike	Telemachos.
But	now	I	grieve	unforgettingly	for	Telemachos,	the	son
175	born	to	Odysseus.	The	gods	made	him	grow	like	a	young	tree,	and	I
thought	he	would	be	among	the	men	one	not	inferior	to	his	dear	father,
admirable	for	build	and	beauty;
but	some	immortal	upset	the	balanced	mind	within	him,
or	else	it	was	some	man.	He	went	after	news	of	his	father
embarks	on	a	false	story
180	to	Pylos	the	sacrosanct,	and	the	haughty	suitors	are	lying	in	wait	for	him
as	he	comes	home,	to	make	Arkeisios’
stock	and	seed	perish	all	away	and	be	nameless	in	Ithaka.
Now	we	will	let	him	be,	however,	whether	they	catch	him
or	whether	he	escapes	and	the	son	of	Kronos	protects	him.
185	But	come	now,	aged	sir,	recite	me	the	tale	of	your	sorrows,	and	tell	me
this	too,	tell	me	truly,	so	that	I	may	know	it:	What	man	are	you	and
whence?	Where	is	your	city?	Your	parents?
What	kind	of	ship	did	you	come	here	on?	And	how	did	the	sailors
bring	you	to	Ithaka?	What	men	do	they	claim	that	they	are?
190	For	I	do	not	think	you	could	have	traveled	on	foot	to	this	country.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:	‘See,	I
will	accurately	answer	all	that	you	ask	me.
I	only	wish	there	were	food	enough	for	the	time,	for	us	two,
and	sweet	wine	for	us	here	inside	of	the	shelter,	so	that
195	we	could	feast	quietly	while	others	tended	the	work;	then	easily	I	could
go	on	for	the	whole	of	a	year,	and	still	not	finish	the	story	of	my	heart's
tribulations,	all	that
hard	work	I	have	done	in	my	time,	because	the	gods	willed	it.
I	announce	that	my	origin	is	from	Crete,	a	spacious
200	land;	I	am	son	of	a	rich	man,	and	there	were	many	other	sons	who	were
born	to	him	and	reared	in	his	palace.	These	were	lawful	sons	by	his	wife,
but	a	bought	woman,	a	concubine,
was	my	mother,	yet	I	was	favored	with	the	legitimate
sons	by	
Kastor
,	
Hylakos’
	son,	whom	I	claim	as	father,	205	honored	among
the	Cretans	in	the	countryside	as	a	god	is,	in	those	days,	for	wealth	and
power	and	glorious	children.
But	then,	you	see,	the	death	spirits	caught	and	carried	him	from	us
to	the	house	of	Hades,	and	his	overbearing	sons	divided
the	livelihood	among	them	and	cast	lots	for	it.	Little
210	enough,	however,	was	what	they	gave	me	in	goods	and	houses.	But	I	took
for	myself	a	wife	from	people	with	many	possessions,	because	of	my
courage,	for	I	was	no	contemptible	man,	not
one	who	fled	from	the	fighting;	but	now	all	that	has	gone	from	me,
but	still,	I	think,	if	you	look	at	the	stubble	you	see	what	the	corn	was
215	like	when	it	grew,	but	since	then	hardship	enough	has	had	me.	Ares	and
Athene	endowed	me	with	courage,	that	power	that	breaks	men	in	battle.
Whenever	I	detailed	the	best	fighters
to	go	into	ambush,	planning	evil	things	for	the	enemy,
Odysseus	claims	to	be	a	veteran	of	Troy
the	proud	heart	in	me	had	no	image	of	death	before	it,
220	but	far	the	first	I	would	leap	out	and	with	my	spear	bring	down	that
enemy	man	whose	speed	of	foot	failed	him	against	me.
Such	was	I	in	the	fighting;	but	labor	was	never	dear	to	me,
nor	care	for	my	house,	though	that	is	what	raises	glorious	children;
but	ships	that	are	driven	on	by	oars	were	dear	to	me	always,
225	and	the	wars,	and	throwing	spears	with	polished	hafts,	and	the	arrows,
gloomy	things,	which	to	other	men	are	terrible,	and	yet	those	things	were
dear	to	me	which	surely	some	god	had	put	there
in	my	heart,	for	different	men	take	joy	in	different	actions.
Before	the	sons	of	the	Achaians	embarked	for	Troy,	I	was
230	nine	times	a	leader	of	men	and	went	in	fast-faring	vessels	against	outland
men,	and	much	substance	came	my	way,	and	from	this	I	took	out	an
abundance	of	things,	but	much	I	allotted
again,	and	soon	my	house	grew	greater,	and	from	that	time	on
I	went	among	the	Cretans	as	one	feared	and	respected.
235	But	when	Zeus	of	the	wide	brows	devised	for	us	that	hateful	expedition,
which	unstrung	the	knees	of	so	many	men,	they	were	urgent	upon	me	and
renowned	Idomeneus
to	lead	with	the	ships	to	Ilion,	and	there	was	no	remedy,
nor	any	refusing,	for	the	hard	speech	of	the	people	constrained	us.
240	Then	for	nine	years	we	sons	of	the	Achaians	fought	there,	and	in	the	tenth
we	sacked	the	city	of	Priam,	and	went	back	homeward	with	our	ships,	and
the	god	scattered	the	Achaians.
But	for	wretched	me	Zeus	of	the	counsels	devised	more	hardships;
one	month	only	I	stayed,	taking	pleasure	in	my	children
245	and	my	wedded	wife	and	my	possessions,	but	then	the	spirit	within	me
urged	me	to	make	an	expedition	to	Egypt	with	ships	well	appointed	and
with	my	godlike	companions.
I	appointed	nine	ships,	and	rapidly	the	people	were	gathered,
and	for	six	days	then	my	eager	companions	continued
250	feasting,	but	I	provided	them	with	abundant	victims	for	sacrifice	to	the
gods,	and	for	themselves	to	make	ready	their	feast.	On	the	seventh	day	we
went	aboard	and	from	wide	Crete
sailed	on	a	North	Wind	that	was	favorable	and	fair.	It	was
easy,	like	sailing	downstream,	so	that	never	a	single
255	one	of	my	ships	was	hurt,	and	we,	unharmed,	without	sickness,	sat	still,
and	let	the	wind	and	the	steersmen	hold	them	steady.
On	the	fifth	day	we	reached	the	abundant	stream	
Aigyptos
,
who	came	to	grief	in	Egypt
and	I	stayed	my	oarswept	ships	inside	the	Aigyptos	River.
Then	I	urged	my	eager	companions	to	stay	where	they	were,	there
260	close	to	the	fleet,	and	to	guard	the	ships,	and	was	urgent	with	them	to	send
look-outs	to	the	watching	places;	but	they,	following	their	own	impulse,
and	giving	way	to	marauding	violence,
suddenly	began	plundering	the	Egyptians’	beautiful
fields,	and	carried	off	the	women	and	innocent	children,
265	and	killed	the	men,	and	soon	the	outcry	came	to	the	city.	They	heard	the
shouting,	and	at	the	time	when	dawn	shows,	they	came	on	us,	and	all	the
plain	was	filled	with	horses	and	infantry
and	the	glare	of	bronze,	and	Zeus	who	delights	in	thunder	flung	down
a	foul	panic	among	my	companions,	and	none	was	so	hardy
270	as	to	stand	and	fight,	for	the	evils	stood	in	a	circle	around	them.	There
they	killed	many	of	us	with	the	sharp	bronze,	and	others	they	led	away
alive,	to	work	for	them	in	forced	labor;
but	Zeus	himself	put	this	thought	into	my	mind,	as	I	will
tell	you,	but	how	I	wish	I	had	died	and	met	my	destiny
275	there	in	Egypt,	for	there	was	still	more	sorrow	awaiting	me.	At	once	I	put
the	well-wrought	helm	from	my	head,	the	great	shield	off	my	shoulders,
and	from	my	hand	I	let	the	spear	drop,
and	went	out	into	the	way	of	the	king	and	up	to	his	chariot,
and	kissed	his	knees	and	clasped	them;	he	rescued	me	and	took	pity
280	and	seated	me	in	his	chariot	and	took	me,	weeping,	homeward	with	him;
and	indeed	many	swept	in	on	me	with	ash	spears	straining	to	kill	me,	for
they	were	all	too	angered,	but	the	king
held	them	off	from	me,	and	honored	the	anger	of	Zeus	Protector
of	Strangers,	who	beyond	others	is	outraged	at	evil	dealings.
285	There	for	seven	years	I	stayed	and	gathered	together	much	substance	from
the	men	of	Egypt,	for	all	gave	to	me;	but	when	in	the	turning	of	time	the
eighth	year	had	befallen	me,
then	there	came	a	Phoenician	man,	well	skilled	in	beguilements,
a	gnawer	at	others’	goods,	and	many	were	the	hurts	he	inflicted
290	on	men,	and	by	his	wits	talked	me	over,	so	I	went	with	him	to	Phoenicia,
where	lay	this	man's	house	and	possessions.
There	for	the	fulfillment	of	a	year	I	stayed	with	him,
but	when	the	months	and	when	the	days	had	come	to	completion,
with	the	circling	back	of	the	year	again,	and	the	seasons	came	on,
295	then	he	took	me	on	his	seafaring	ship	to	Libya,	with	lying	advices,	that
with	him	we	could	win	a	cargo,	but	in	fact
He	claims	to	have	bad	news
so	he	could	sell	me	there	and	take	the	immense	price	for	me.
I	went	with	him	on	his	ship,	forced	to,	although	I	suspected
all,	on	a	North	Wind	that	was	favorable	and	fair,	above
300	the	middle	of	Crete,	but	Zeus	was	plotting	these	men's	destruction.	But
after	we	had	left	Crete	behind	us,	and	there	was	no	more	land	in	sight,	but
only	the	sky	and	the	sea,	then	Kronian
Zeus	drew	on	a	blue-black	cloud,	and	settled	it	over
the	hollow	ship,	and	the	open	sea	was	darkened	beneath	it.
305	Zeus	with	thunder	and	lightning	together	crashed	on	our	vessel,	and,
struck	by	the	thunderbolt	of	Zeus,	she	spun	in	a	circle,	and	all	was	full	of
brimstone.	The	men	were	thrown	in	the	water,
and	bobbing	like	sea	crows	they	were	washed	away	on	the	running
waves	all	around	the	black	ship,	and	the	god	took	away	their	homecoming.
310	But	Zeus	himself,	though	I	had	pain	in	my	heart,	then	put	into	my	hands
the	giant	mast	of	the	ship	with	dark	prows,	so	that	I	still	could	escape	the
evil,	and	I	embracing
this	was	swept	along	before	the	destructive	stormwinds.
Nine	days	I	was	swept	along,	and	on	the	tenth,	in	black	night,
315	the	great	wave	rolling	washed	me	up	on	the	shore	of	Thesprotia.	There	the
king	of	the	
Thesprotians
,	the	hero	
Pheidon
,	looked	after	me	without	price,
for	his	own	dear	son	had	come	on	me
when	I	was	beaten	by	weariness	and	cold	air,	and	lifted	me
up	by	the	hands,	and	led	me	home	to	the	house	of	his	father,
320	and	put	a	mantle	and	tunic	about	me	to	wear	as	clothing.	It	was	there	I
had	word	of	Odysseus,	for	this	king	told	me	he	had	feasted	and	friended
him	on	his	way	back	to	his	own	country;
and	he	showed	me	all	the	possessions	gathered	in	by	Odysseus,
bronze	and	gold	and	difficulty	wrought	iron.	Truly,
325	that	would	feed	a	succession	of	heirs	to	the	tenth	generation,	such	are	the
treasures	stored	for	him	in	the	house	of	the	great	king.
But	he	said	Odysseus	had	gone	to	
Dodona
,	to	listen	to	the	will	of	Zeus,	out
of	the	holy	deep-leaved	oak	tree,
for	how	he	could	come	back	to	the	rich	countryside	of	Ithaka,
330	in	secret	or	openly,	having	been	by	now	long	absent.	And	he	swore	to	me
in	my	presence,	as	he	poured	out	a	libation	in	his	house,	that	the	ship	was
drawn	down	to	the	sea	and	the	crew	were	ready	to	carry	Odysseus	back
again	to	his	own	dear	country;
but	before	that	he	sent	me	off,	for	a	ship	of	Thesprotian
of	Odysseus	on	his	way	home
335	men	happened	then	to	be	sailing	for	Doulichion,	rich	in	wheatfields;	so	he
urged	them	to	convey	me	there	to	the	king	
Akastos
,	in	a	proper	way,	but
their	hearts	were	taken	with	a	bad	counsel
concerning	me,	so	I	still	should	have	the	pain	of	affliction.
So	when	the	seafaring	ship	had	gone	far	out	from	the	mainland,
340	they	presently	devised	the	day	of	slavery	for	me.	They	took	off	me	the
mantle	and	tunic	I	wore	as	clothing,	and	then	they	put	another	vile	rag	on
me,	and	a	tunic,
tattered,	the	one	you	yourself	see	with	your	eyes.	At	evening
time	they	made	their	way	off	the	fields	of	sunny	Ithaka,
345	and	there	they	tied	me	fast	in	the	strong-benched	ship,	with	a	rope's	end
twisted	and	tightly	about	me,	and	themselves	disembarking	speedily	took
their	evening	meal	on	the	sand	of	the	seashore.
But	the	very	gods	themselves	untied	the	knots	that	were	on	me
easily,	and	I,	wrapping	my	head	in	a	rag,	climbed	down
350	the	polished	plank	that	was	there	for	loading,	and	let	my	chest	into	the
sea,	then	struck	out	with	both	my	arms,	and	thus	swimming	I	very	soon
was	out	of	the	water	and	close	to	where	they	were.
Then	I	went	up,	where	there	was	a	growth	of	flowering	thicket,
and	lay	there,	cowering;	they	with	outcry	great	and	sorrowful
355	came	back	to	search,	but	then	it	seemed	there	was	no	more	profit	in
looking	for	me	any	longer,	and	so	they	went	back,	boarding	their	hollow
ship	again;	but	it	was	the	gods	who	concealed	me
easily,	and	it	was	they	who	brought	me	here	to	the	steading
of	an	understanding	man.	So	now,	life	is	still	my	portion.’
360	Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘O	sorrowful
stranger,	truly	you	troubled	the	spirit	in	me,	by	telling	me	all	these	details,
how	you	suffered	and	wandered;	yet	I	think	some	part	is	in	no	true	order,
and	you	will	not	persuade	me
in	your	talk	about	Odysseus.	Why	should	such	a	man	as	you	are
365	lie	recklessly	to	me?	But	I	myself	know	the	whole	truth	of	what	my	lord's
homecoming	is,	how	all	the	gods	hated	him	so	much	that	they	did	not
make	him	go	down	in	the	land	of	the	Trojans,
nor	in	the	arms	of	his	friends,	after	he	had	wound	up	the	fighting.
So	all	the	Achaians	would	have	heaped	a	grave	mound	over	him,
370	and	he	would	have	won	great	fame	for	himself	and	his	son	hereafter.	But
now	ingloriously	the	stormwinds	have	caught	and	carried	him.
But	I	keep	away	and	with	my	pigs,	and	I	do	not	go	now
to	the	city,	unless	circumspect	Penelope	for	some	reason
Eumaios	is	skeptical
asks	me	to	go,	when	word	comes	in	from	one	place	or	another;
375	and	there	are	those	who	sit	beside	me	and	question	me	over	particulars,
whether	they	are	grieving	for	a	lord	long	absent,	or	are	happy	at	eating	up
his	substance	without	recompense.
But	I	have	no	liking	for	this	inquiry	and	asking	of	questions,
since	that	time	an	
Aitolian
	man	beguiled	me	by	telling	380	a	story.	This
one	had	killed	a	man	and	wandered	over	much	country.	He	came	to	my
house	and	I	entertained	him	fondly.
He	said	he	had	seen	him	with	Idomeneus,	among	the	Cretan
men,	repairing	his	ships,	for	the	stormwinds	had	smashed	them,
and	he	said	he	would	be	coming	back,	in	the	summer	or	autumn,
385	bringing	in	many	possessions,	and	with	his	godlike	companions.	You	too,
old	man	of	many	sorrows,	since	the	spirit	brought	you	here	to	me,	do	not
try	to	please	me	nor	spell	me	with	lying
words.	It	is	not	for	that	I	will	entertain	and	befriend	you,
but	for	fear	of	Zeus,	the	god	of	guests,	and	for	my	own	pity.’
390	Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:	‘Truly,	the
mind	in	you	is	something	very	suspicious.	Not	even	with	an	oath	can	I
bring	you	round,	nor	persuade	you.
Come	now,	we	two	shall	make	an	agreement,	and	for	the	future
the	gods	who	hold	Olympos	shall	be	witnesses	to	both	sides.
395	As	your	lord	makes	his	homecoming	into	his	palace	here,	you	shall	give
me	a	tunic	and	mantle	to	wear,	and	send	me	on	my	way	to	Doulichion,
where	my	heart	has	been	desiring
to	go;	but	if	your	lord	never	comes	in	the	way	I	tell	you
he	will,	set	your	serving	men	on	me,	and	throw	me	over	a	high	cliff,
400	so	the	next	vagabond	will	be	careful,	and	not	lie	to	you.’
Then	in	turn	the	glorious	swineherd	spoke	to	him	in	answer:	‘That
would	be	virtuous	of	me,	my	friend,	and	good	reputation	would	be	mine
among	men,	for	present	time	alike	and	hereafter,
if	first	I	led	you	into	my	shelter,	there	entertained	you
405	as	guest,	then	murdered	you	and	ravished	the	dear	life	from	you.	Then
cheerfully	I	could	go	and	pray	to	Zeus,	son	of	Kronos.
But	now	it	is	time	for	our	dinner,	and	I	hope	my	companions	come	in
soon,	so	we	can	prepare	a	good	dinner	here	in	my	shelter.’
So	these	two	remained	conversing	this	way	together,
410	and	the	sows	came	up,	and	with	them	came	the	men	who	were
swineherds,	and	they	penned	the	sows	for	the	night	inside	their
accustomed	places,
but	entertains	him	well
and	an	endless	clamor	went	up	from	the	crowding	swine.	Thereafter
the	glorious	swineherd	gave	the	word	to	his	own	companions:
‘Bring	in	the	best	of	the	pigs,	to	sacrifice	for	our	stranger
415	guest	from	afar,	and	we	ourselves	shall	enjoy	it,	we	who	long	have
endured	this	wretched	work	for	the	pigs	with	shining	teeth,	while	others	at
no	cost	eat	up	what	we	have	worked	on.’
So	he	spoke,	and	with	the	pitiless	bronze	split	kindling,
and	the	men	brought	in	a	pig,	five	years	old	and	a	very	fat	one,
420	and	made	it	stand	in	front	of	the	fireplace,	nor	did	the	swineherd	forget
the	immortal	gods,	for	he	had	the	uses	of	virtue;	but	he	cut	off	hairs	from
the	head	of	the	white-toothed	pig,	and	threw	them
into	the	fire	as	dedication,	and	prayed	to	all	the	gods
that	Odysseus	of	the	many	designs	should	have	his	homecoming.
425	He	hit	the	beast	with	a	split	of	oak	that	he	had	lying	by	him.	The	breath
went	out	of	the	pig;	then	they	slaughtered	him	and	singed	him,	then
jointed	the	carcass,	and	the	swineherd	laid	pieces	of	raw	meat
with	offerings	from	all	over	the	body	upon	the	thick	fat,
and	sprinkled	these	with	meal	of	barley	and	threw	them	in	the	fire,	then
430	they	cut	all	the	remainder	into	pieces	and	spitted	them,	and	roasted	all
carefully	and	took	off	the	pieces,	and	laid	it	all	together	on	platters.	The
swineherd
stood	up	to	divide	the	portions,	for	he	was	fair	minded,
and	separated	all	the	meat	into	seven	portions.
435	One	he	set	aside,	with	a	prayer,	for	the	nymphs	and	Hermes,	the	son	of
Maia
,	and	the	rest	he	distributed	to	each	man,	but	gave	Odysseus	in	honor
the	long	cuts	of	the	chine's	portion
of	the	white-toothed	pig,	and	so	exalted	the	heart	of	his	master.
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	to	him	and	addressed	him:
440	‘I	wish,	Eumaios,	you	could	be	as	dear	to	our	father	Zeus	as	to	me,	when	I
am	so	poor,	but	you	grace	me	with	good	things.’
Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Eat,	my	guest,	strange	man	that	you	are,	and	take	your	pleasure
of	what	is	here	now;	the	god	will	give	you	such,	or	will	let	it
445	be,	as	in	his	own	mind	he	may	wish.	He	can	do	anything.’
He	spoke,	and	sacrificed	first-offerings	to	the	immortal	gods,	then
poured	bright	wine	for	Odysseus,	sacker	of	cities,	and	put	the	cup	in	his
hands,	and	sat	down	to	his	own	portion.
Odysseus	hints	for	a	mantle
Mesaulios
	served	the	bread	to	them,	a	man	whom	the	swineherd	450
owned	himself	by	himself	and	apart	from	his	absent	master,	and
independently	of	his	mistress	and	aged	Laertes,	having	bought	him	from
the	Taphians	with	his	own	possessions.
They	put	forth	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,
455	Mesaulios	took	the	food	away	again,	and	they	made	haste	to	go	to	bed,
filled	with	bread	and	meat	to	repletion.
A	bad	night	came	on,	the	dark	of	the	moon,	and	Zeus	rained
all	night	long,	and	the	West	Wind	blew	big,	always	watery.
Odysseus	spoke	among	them.	He	was	trying	it	out	on	the	swineherd,
460	to	see	if	he	might	take	off	his	mantle	and	give	it	him,	or	tell	one	of	his
men	to	do	it,	since	he	cared	for	him	so	greatly:	‘Hear	me	now,	Eumaios
and	all	you	other	companions.
What	I	say	will	be	a	bit	of	boasting.	The	mad	wine	tells	me
to	do	it.	Wine	sets	even	a	thoughtful	man	to	singing,
465	or	sets	him	into	softly	laughing,	sets	him	to	dancing.	Sometimes	it	tosses
out	a	word	that	was	better	unspoken.
But	now	I	have	broken	into	loud	speech	I	will	not	suppress	it.
I	wish	I	were	young	again	and	the	strength	still	steady	within	me,
as	when,	under	Troy,	we	formed	an	ambush	detail	and	led	it.
470	The	leaders	were	Odysseus	and	Atreus’	son,	Menelaos,	and	I	made	a	third
leader	with	them,	since	they	themselves	asked	me.
But	when	we	had	come	underneath	the	city	and	the	steep	wall,
we,	all	about	the	city	in	marshy	ground	and	the	dense	growth
of	swamp	grass	and	the	reeds,	and	huddling	under	our	armor,
475	lay	there,	and	a	bad	night	came	on	with	a	rush	of	the	North	Wind	freezing,
and	from	above	came	a	fall	of	snow,	chilling	like	frost,	and	on	the	shields’
edges	the	ice	formed,	rimming	them.
There	all	the	other	men	were	wearing	both	mantles	and	tunics,
and	they	slept	at	ease,	pulling	their	great	shields	over	their	shoulders,
480	but	I,	in	my	carelessness	when	I	started	with	my	companions,	had	left	my
mantle;	I	never	thought	I	would	be	so	cold,	but	went	along	with	only	my
shield	and	my	shining	waist	guard.
But	when	it	was	the	third	time	of	the	night	and	after	the	star	change,
then	I	spoke	to	Odysseus,	for	he	was	lying	next	me,
485	nudging	him	with	my	elbow,	and	he	listened	at	once.	I	said:	“Son	of
Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,	I	shall	no	longer	be	left
among	the	living.	The	weather
by	telling	a	yarn	about	Troy
is	too	much	for	me.	I	have	no	mantle.	The	spirit	made	me
silly,	to	go	half-dressed,	and	now	there	is	no	escape	for	me.”
490	So	I	spoke,	and	he	immediately	had	an	idea	in	his	mind,	such	a	man	he
was	for	counseling,	as	for	fighting.
He	spoke	to	me	in	a	little	voice	and	said	a	word	to	me:
“Be	quiet	now,	let	no	other	of	the	Achaians	hear	you.”
Then	he	propped	his	head	on	his	elbow	and	spoke	a	word,	out	loud:
495	“Hear	me,	friends.	In	my	sleep	a	divine	dream	came	to	me.	We	have	come
too	far	away	from	the	ships.	Now,	would	there	be	someone	to	tell
Agamemnon,	Atreus’	son,	shepherd	of	the	people,
so	he	might	send	more	of	the	men	by	the	ships	to	come	here	to	us?”
So	he	spoke,	and	
Thoas
	sprang	up,	the	son	of	
Andraimon
,	500	quickly,	and
took	off	and	laid	aside	his	red	mantle,	and	went	on	the	run	for	the	ships,
and	I	lay	down	in	his	clothes,	happily,	and	rested	until	Dawn	of	the	golden
throne	came.
I	wish	I	were	young	like	that	and	the	strength	still	steady	within	me.
Some	one	of	the	swineherds	in	this	house	would	give	me	a	mantle,
505	both	for	love	and	out	of	respect	for	a	strong	warrior.	Now	they	slight	me
because	I	wear	vile	clothing	upon	me.’
Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Old	sir,	that	was	a	blameless	fable	the	way	you	told	it;
and	you	have	made	no	unprofitable	speech,	nor	one	that
510	missed	the	point,	so	you	shall	not	lack	for	clothes,	nor	anything	rightfully
due	the	unhappy	suppliant	who	approaches	us.
For	now,	that	is.	You	must	flaunt	your	rags	again	in	the	morning.
There	are	not	many	extra	mantles	and	extra	tunics
here	to	change	into.	There	is	only	one	set	for	each	man.
515	When,	however,	the	dear	son	of	Odysseus	comes	back,	he	will	give	you	a
mantle	and	tunic	to	wear	as	clothing,	and	send	you	wherever	your	heart
and	spirit	desire	to	be	sent.’
So	he	spoke,	and	sprang	up,	and	laid	a	bed	for	him	next	to
the	fire,	and	threw	the	fleeces	of	sheep	and	goats	over	it.
520	There	Odysseus	lay	down,	and	he	threw	over	him	a	mantle	that	was	great
and	thick,	which	he	kept	by	him	as	an	extra	covering	to	wrap	in	when
winter	weather	came	on	and	was	too	rigorous.
So	there	Odysseus	went	to	bed	and	the	young	men	beside	him
lay	down	also	to	go	to	sleep.	Only	the	swineherd
525	did	not	please	to	leave	his	pigs,	and	go	to	bed	indoors,
Eumaios	sleeps	with	the	pigs
but	made	preparations	as	he	went	out;	and	Odysseus	was	happy	that	his
livelihood	was	so	well	cared	for	while	he	was	absent.
First	the	swineherd	slung	his	sharp	sword	on	his	heavy	shoulders,
and	put	a	very	thick	mantle	about	him,	to	keep	the	wind	out,
530	and	took	up	also	the	hairy	skin	of	a	great,	well-conditioned	goat,	and	took
up	a	sharp	javelin	as	a	protection	against	men	and	dogs,	and	went	to	sleep
where	his	pigs,	with	shining
teeth,	lay	in	the	hollow	of	a	rock,	sheltered	from	the	North	Wind.
BOOK	XV
At	this	time,	Pallas	Athene	made	her	way	into	wide-spaced
Lakedaimon,	to	remind	the	shining	son	of	great-hearted
Odysseus	of	his	journey	home,	and	speed	his	homecoming.
She	found	Telemachos	there	with	the	glorious	son	of	Nestor,
5	sleeping	in	the	forecourt	of	worshipful	Menelaos.
Indeed,	the	son	of	Nestor	was	held	fast	in	the	softening
sleep,	but	the	sweet	sleep	was	not	on	Telemachos,	wakeful
through	the	immortal	night,	with	anxious	thoughts	of	his	father.
Gray-eyed	Athene	stood	close	by	his	head	and	addressed	him:
10	‘Telemachos,	it	no	longer	becomes	you	to	stray	off	so	far
from	home,	leaving	your	possessions	behind	and	men	in	your	palace	who
are	so	overbearing.	You	must	not	let	them	divide	up
and	eat	up	all	your	substance,	and	make	your	journey	a	vain	one.
So	urge	Menelaos	of	the	great	war	cry	with	all	speed	to	give	you	15
conveyance,	so	you	will	find	your	stately	mother	is	still	there	at	home,
since	now	her	father	and	her	brothers	are	urgent	with	her	to	marry
Eurymachos.	He	is	outdoing	the	rest	of	suitors
in	the	giving	of	gifts,	and	has	been	piling	up	presents	to	win	her.
No	property	must	go	out	of	the	house,	unless	you	consent	to	it.
20	For	you	know	what	the	mind	is	like	in	the	breast	of	a	woman.
She	wants	to	build	up	the	household	of	the	man	who	marries	her,	and	of
former	children,	and	of	her	beloved	and	wedded	husband,	she	has	no
remembrance,	when	he	is	dead,	nor	does	she	think	of	him.
For	yourself,	when	you	come	back,	you	should	turn	over	everything
Telemachos	asks	Menelaos
25	to	whichever	one	of	the	serving	women	seems	to	be	the	best	one,	until	the
gods	show	who	is	to	be	your	honored	wife.	Also
you	should	put	away	in	your	heart	this	other	thing	that	I	tell	you.
The	best	men	of	the	suitors	are	lying	in	wait,	on	purpose,
for	you	in	the	passage	between	rocky	Samos	and	Ithaka,
30	longing	to	kill	you,	before	you	come	back	to	your	own	country.
But	I	think	they	will	not	achieve	it.	Sooner	the	earth	will	close	over	some
one	of	the	suitors,	they	who	are	eating	away	your	substance.
But	you	must	keep	your	well-made	ship	away	from	the	islands,
and	sail	with	the	night,	and	that	one	of	the	immortals	who	watches	35	over
you	and	guards	you	will	send	a	following	stern	wind.
But	when	you	make	land,	at	the	first	promontory	on	Ithaka,
then	speed	your	ship	and	all	your	companions	along	to	the	city,	but	you
yourself	go	first	of	all	to	the	swineherd,	that	man
who	is	in	charge	of	the	pigs,	and	whose	thoughts	toward	you	are	kindly.
40	There	spend	the	night,	but	speed	the	man	along	to	the	city
to	take	your	message	to	circumspect	Penelope,	saying
that	you	are	alive	and	safe,	and	you	have	come	home	from	Pylos.’
So	she	spoke,	and	then	went	away,	back	to	tall	Olympos,
and	Telemachos	wakened	Nestor's	son	out	of	his	sweet	sleep,
45	stirring	him	with	a	nudge	of	his	heel,	and	spoke	a	word	to	him:	‘Wake,
Peisistratos,	son	of	Nestor,	and	bring	your	solid-hoofed	horses	under	the
yoke	to	harness,	so	we	can	start	back.’
Peisistratos,	the	son	of	Nestor,	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Telemachos,	though	we	long	for	the	journey,	surely	we	cannot	50	drive
through	the	dark	of	the	night,	but	it	will	be	daylight	presently.
But	wait	until	the	hero,	the	son	of	Atreus,	spear-famed
Menelaos,	brings	you	his	gifts	to	put	in	the	chariot,
and	speaks	to	us,	and	with	kind	words	sends	us	away	on	our	journey.
For	a	guest	remembers	all	his	days	the	man	who	received	him
55	as	a	host	receives	a	guest,	and	gave	him	the	gifts	of	friendship.’
So	he	spoke,	and	soon	after	Dawn	of	the	golden	throne	came,
and,	rising	up	from	his	bed	where	he	lay	by	sweet-haired	Helen,	Menelaos
of	the	great	war	cry	came	and	stood	near	them.
As	soon	then	as	the	dear	son	of	Odysseus	noted	him,
60	he	made	haste	to	slip	the	shimmering	tunic	over
his	skin,	and	the	hero	threw	a	great	mantle	over	his	heavy
shoulders,	and	went	to	the	door,	and	stood	by	his	host	and	addressed	him,
for	permission	to	leave
he,	Telemachos,	the	dear	son	of	godlike	Odysseus:
‘Great	Menelaos,	son	of	Atreus,	leader	of	the	people,
65	now	send	me	on	my	way	at	last	to	my	own	dear	country,
for	now	the	heart	within	me	longs	for	the	homeward	journey.’
Then	in	turn	Menelaos	of	the	great	war	cry	answered:
‘Telemachos,	I	for	my	part	never	will	long	detain	you
here	when	you	strain	for	home.	I	would	disapprove	of	another
70	hospitable	man	who	was	excessive	in	friendship,
as	of	one	excessive	in	hate.	In	all	things	balance	is	better.
It	is	equally	bad	when	one	speeds	on	the	guest	unwilling
to	go,	and	when	he	holds	back	one	who	is	hastening.	Rather
one	should	befriend	the	guest	who	is	there,	but	speed	him	when	he	wishes.
75	Yet	stay,	until	I	can	bring	you	fine	gifts	to	put	in	your	chariot,	and	you	can
look	at	them	with	your	eyes,	while	I	tell	the	women	to	prepare	a	dinner
out	of	what	we	have	here	in	abundance.
For	there	is	both	honor	and	brilliance	in	it,	and	there	also	is	profit,	to	dine,
then	go	a	long	way	over	the	endless	earth.	Therefore,	80	if	you	wish	to
make	a	tour	through	Hellas	and	midmost	Argos,
and	have	me	go	myself	with	you,	I	will	harness	my	horses
and	be	your	guide	through	the	cities	of	men,	and	there	will	be	no	one	who
will	send	us	away	just	as	we	are,	but	each	one	will	give	us	one	thing	to
carry	away	with	us,	some	tripod	or	caldron
85	well	wrought	in	bronze,	or	a	pair	of	mules,	or	a	golden	goblet.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Great	Menelaos,	son	of	Atreus,	leader	of	the	people,
I	wish	now	to	go	back	to	our	country,	for	I	left	behind	me
no	one	when	I	went,	to	look	after	my	own	possessions.
90	I	must	not,	going	in	search	of	my	godlike	father,	ruin
myself,	or	have	some	stored-up	treasure	lost	from	my	palace.’
But	as	soon	as	Menelaos	of	the	great	war	cry	had	heard	this,
immediately	he	told	his	wife	and	all	the	maidservants
to	prepare	a	dinner	out	of	what	was	there	in	abundance;
95	and,	risen	from	his	bed,	Eteoneus	the	son	of	Boethoös
came	to	them,	since	he	had	his	own	dwelling	not	far	from	them.
Menelaos	of	the	great	war	cry	told	him	to	kindle
the	fire	and	roast	the	meat,	nor	did	the	man	disobey	him.
Meanwhile	he	himself	went	into	the	fragrant	chamber,
100	not	alone,	but	Megapenthes	and	Helen	went	with	him.
Courtesies	and	gift-giving
But	when	they	came	to	the	place	where	they	had	their	treasures	stored,	the
son	of	Atreus	took	up	the	goblet,	handled	on	both	sides,
and	told	Megapenthes	to	carry	the	mixing	bowl,	that	was	made
of	silver;	but	Helen	went	to	stand	by	the	storing	boxes,
105	where	there	were	elaborately	wrought	robes.	She	herself	had	made	them.
And	Helen,	shining	among	women,	lifted	out	one	of	them,
that	which	was	the	loveliest	in	design	and	the	largest
and	shone	like	a	star.	It	lay	beneath	the	others.	She	went	on	her	way,
further	and	out	through	the	house,	until	she	came	to	110	Telemachos;	then
fair-haired	Menelaos	said	to	him:
‘Telemachos,	may	Zeus,	loud-thundering	husband	of	Hera,
accomplish	your	homeward	journey	in	the	way	that	your	heart	desires	it.
Of	all	those	gifts	that	lie	stored	away	in	my	house	I	will	give	you	the	one
which	is	most	splendid	and	esteemed	at	the	highest	value.
115	I	will	give	you	a	fashioned	mixing	bowl.	It	is	of	silver,
all	but	the	edges,	and	these	are	finished	in	gold.	This	is
the	work	of	Hephaistos.	The	hero	Phaidimos,	the	Sidonians’
king,	gave	it	to	me,	when	his	house	took	me	in	and	sheltered	me	there,	on
my	way	home.	I	would	give	it	to	you	for	a	present.’
120	So	speaking,	the	hero,	Atreus’	son,	put	the	handled	goblet	into	his	hands,
and	meanwhile	strong	Megapenthes	carried	out	the	mixing	bowl	gleaming
with	silver	and	set	it
before	them.	Helen	of	the	fair	cheeks	stood	by,	holding
the	robe	in	her	hands,	and	spoke	to	him	and	named	him,	saying:	125	‘I	too
give	you	this	gift,	dear	child:	something	to	remember	from	Helen's	hands,
for	your	wife	to	wear	at	the	lovely	occasion	of	your	marriage.	Until	that
time	let	it	lie	away	in	your	palace,	in	your	dear	mother's	keeping;	and	I
hope	you	come	back	rejoicing	to	your	own	strong-founded	house	and	to
the	land	of	your	fathers.’
130	So	speaking,	she	put	it	in	his	hands,	and	he	gladly	received	it.	The	hero
Peisistratos	took	the	presents	and	packed	them	into	the	carrying	basket,
and	in	his	own	mind	admired	everything.
Fair-haired	Menelaos	led	them	back	into	his	palace,
and	the	two	young	men	seated	themselves	on	chairs	and	benches.
135	A	maidservant	brought	water	for	them	and	poured	it	from	a	splendid	and
golden	pitcher,	holding	it	above	a	silver	basin
for	them	to	wash,	and	she	pulled	a	polished	table	before	them.
A	grave	housekeeper	brought	in	the	bread	and	served	it	to	them,	adding
many	good	things	to	it,	generous	with	her	provisions,
A	portent	read	by	Helen
140	and	the	son	of	Boethoös	carved	the	meat	and	served	out	the	portions,
while	the	son	of	glorious	Menelaos	poured	the	wine	for	them.
They	put	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	then
Telemachos	and	the	glorious	son	of	Nestor
145	harnessed	the	horses	and	mounted	up	into	the	chariot	bright	with	bronze,
and	drove	them	out	the	front	door	and	the	echoing	portico.
But	fair-haired	Menelaos	the	son	of	Atreus	followed,
bearing	in	his	right	hand	a	golden	cup	that	was	filled	with
wine	as	sweet	as	honey,	so	they	could	pour	a	libation
150	as	they	went.	He	stood	before	the	chariot	and	spoke	and	pledged	them:
‘Farewell,	young	men;	give	my	greeting	to	the	shepherd	of	the	people,
Nestor,	for	always	he	was	kind	to	me	like	a	father,
when	we	sons	of	the	Achaians	were	fighting	in	Troy	land.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
155	‘Surely,	illustrious	sir,	when	we	arrive	we	shall	tell	him
all	that	you	say,	and	I	wish	that	even	so	I	too,	arriving
in	Ithaka,	could	find	Odysseus	there	in	our	palace,
and	tell	him	I	was	returning	from	you,	having	had	all	loving
treatment,	and	bringing	many	excellent	treasures	given	me.’
160	As	he	spoke	a	bird	flew	by	on	the	right,	an	eagle	carrying	in	his	talons	a
great	white	goose	he	had	caught	tame	from	the	yard,	and	all	of	them,	men
and	women,	with	stopped	breath	followed	his	flight;	but	the	eagle,	as	he
approached	them,
shot	by	on	the	right	before	the	chariot,	and	they	seeing
165	were	filled	with	joy	and	the	hearts	in	all	of	them	were	softened.
First	of	them	to	speak	was	Peisistratos,	son	of	Nestor:
‘Menelaos,	illustrious,	leader	of	the	people,	tell	us
whether	the	god	showed	this	sign	for	you,	or	was	it	for	us	two?’
So	he	spoke,	and	warlike	Menelaos	was	pondering
170	how	to	speak	his	thoughts	the	right	way	and	give	them	an	answer;	but
Helen	of	the	light	robes	anticipated	him,	saying:
‘Hear	me!	I	shall	be	your	prophet,	the	way	the	immortals
put	it	into	my	heart,	and	I	think	it	will	be	accomplished.
As	this	eagle	came	down	from	the	mountain,	where	was	his	origin	175	and
parentage,	and	caught	the	goose	that	was	nursed	in	the	household,	so
Odysseus,	after	wandering	long	and	suffering
much,	will	come	home	and	take	revenge;	or	he	is	already
Return	to	Pylos—Nestor	avoided
home,	and	making	a	plan	of	evil	for	all	of	the	suitors.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
180	‘May	Zeus,	high	thundering	husband	of	Hera,	so	appoint	it.
Then	even	at	home	I	would	make	my	prayers	to	you,	as	to	a	goddess.’
He	spoke,	and	laid	the	lash	on	his	horses,	and	they	very	quickly
and	with	eager	spirit	dashed	away	to	the	plain,	through	the	city.
All	day	long	they	shook	the	yoke	they	wore	on	their	shoulders.
185	And	the	sun	set,	and	all	the	journeying	ways	were	darkened.	They	came
to	Pherai	and	reached	the	house	of	Diokles,	who	was	son	of	Ortilochos,
whom	Alpheios	once	had	childed.
There	they	slept	the	night	and	he	gave	them	hospitality.
But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
190	they	yoked	the	horses	again	and	mounted	the	chariots	bright	with	bronze,
and	drove	them	out	the	front	door	and	the	echoing	portico,	and	he
whipped	them	into	a	run	and	they	winged	their	way	unreluctant.
Presently	they	approached	the	sheer	citadel	of	Pylos,
and	then	Telemachos	spoke	a	word	to	the	son	of	Nestor:
195	‘Son	of	Nestor,	would	you	accept	what	I	say	and	bring	it
to	pass?	For	you	and	I	can	avow	ourselves	friends	forever
because	of	our	fathers’	love,	and	the	two	of	us	are	the	same	age,	and	this
journey	of	ours	will	add	to	the	feeling	we	have	for	each	other.
Then	do	not	take	me,	illustrious,	past	my	ship,	but	leave	me
200	there,	for	fear	the	old	man	in	his	affection	will	keep	me
in	his	house	longer	than	I	wish.	But	I	must	make	my	way	quickly.’
He	spoke,	and	the	son	of	Nestor	pondered	the	thought	within	him,
how	he	could	fairly	undertake	this	and	see	it	accomplished.
In	the	division	of	his	heart	this	way	seemed	best	to	him.
205	He	turned	the	horses	toward	the	fast	ship	and	the	sand	of	the	seashore,
and	onto	the	stern	of	the	ship	unloaded	the	beautiful	presents,	the	clothing
and	the	gold,	which	Menelaos	had	given,
and	spoke,	speeding	him	on	his	way,	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:
‘Go	aboard	now	in	haste,	and	urge	on	all	your	companions
210	to	go,	before	I	reach	home	and	take	the	news	to	the	old	man.
For	I	know	this	thing	well	in	my	heart,	and	my	mind	knows	it,	how
overbearing	his	anger	will	be,	and	he	will	not	let	you
go,	but	will	come	himself	to	summon	you,	and	I	do	not	think
he	will	go	away	without	you.	As	it	is,	he	will	be	very	angry.’
215	So	he	spoke,	and	drove	away	his	bright-maned	horses	back	to	the	city	of
the	Pylians,	and	reached	his	home	quickly.
Encounter	with	a	fugitive
Telemachos	then	gave	the	sign	and	urged	his	companions:
‘Put	all	running	gear	in	order,	friends,	on	the	black	ship,
and	let	us	ourselves	go	aboard,	so	we	can	get	on	with	the	journey.’
220	So	he	spoke,	and	they	listened	well	to	him	and	obeyed	him,	and	quickly
they	went	aboard	the	ship	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks.
So,	while	he	was	busy	with	prayer	and	sacrifice	to	Athene
beside	the	stern	of	the	ship,	there	came	to	him	an	outlander
from	Argos,	where	he	had	killed	a	man;	now	he	was	a	fugitive.
225	He	was	a	prophet,	and	by	blood	was	of	the	stock	of	Melampous.
Melampous	once	had	lived	in	Pylos,	mother	of	sheepflocks,
a	rich	man	among	the	Pylians,	at	home	in	his	high	house;
but	then	he	came	to	the	land	of	other	men,	fleeing	his	country	and	great-
hearted	Neleus,	the	proudest	of	all	men	living,
230	who	until	a	year	was	fulfilled	kept	much	of	his	substance
by	force,	for	Melampous	meanwhile	in	the	halls	of	
Phylakos
was	held	in	constraint	of	wearisome	bondage,	suffering	strong	pains	for	the
sake	of	Neleus’	daughter,	and	the	bitter	infatuation
which	the	goddess	
Erinys
,	wrecker	of	houses,	inflicted	upon	him.
235	Yet	he	escaped	death,	and	drove	away	the	loud-lowing	cattle
from	Phylake	to	Pylos,	and	achieved	the	unjust	labor
godlike	Neleus	imposed	on	him,	and	led	back	the	lady
to	his	brother's	house;	but	he	himself	went	to	the	land	of	others,	to	horse-
pasturing	Argos,	since	now	it	was	ordained	for	him
240	that	he	should	live	there	and	be	lord	over	many	Argives.
And	there	he	too	married	a	wife	and	established	a	high-roofed	house,	and
had	children,	
Mantios
	and	
Antiphates
,	strong	sons.
Antiphates	had	a	son;	this	was	great-hearted	
Oïkles
.
His	son	was	
Amphiaraos
,	leader	of	storming	armies,	245	whom	Zeus	of	the
aegis	loved	in	his	heart,	as	did	Apollo,
with	every	favor,	but	he	never	came	to	the	doorsill	of	old	age,	but	perished
in	Thebes,	because	his	wife	had	been	bribed	with	presents.
He	in	turn	had	sons,	
Amphilochos
	and	
Alkmaion
.
The	children	born	to	Mantios	were	
Polypheides
	and	Kleitos,	250	but	Dawn
of	the	golden	throne	carried	
Kleitos
	away,	because	of	his	beauty,	so	that	he
might	dwell	among	the	immortals;
but	Apollo	made	high-hearted	Polypheides	a	prophet,
and	far	the	best	among	mortals,	after	Amphiaraos
had	died.	He,	angered	with	his	father,	in	
Hyperesia
255	lived	and	was	lord,	and	there	he	was	a	prophet	for	all	men.
Theoklymenos	the	fugitive	prophet
It	was	this	man's	son,	by	name	
Theoklymenos
,	who	now	came	to
Telemachos	and	stood	near,	and	there	he	found	him
pouring	libation	and	praying	beside	his	fast	black	vessel.
He	came	and	spoke	to	him	aloud	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	260
‘Dear	friend,	since	I	have	found	you	in	this	place,	making	sacrifice,	I
entreat	you,	first	by	these	rites	and	spirit,	then	also
by	your	own	head	and	by	your	companions,	who	travel	with	you,	tell	me
truly	this	thing	that	I	ask	you,	and	hold	back	nothing:	What	man	are	you
and	whence?	Where	is	your	city?	Your	parents?’
265	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘Friend,	I	will
accurately	answer	all	that	you	ask	me.
Ithaka	is	my	country,	and	Odysseus	is	my	father,
if	ever	he	lived;	but	by	now	he	must	have	died	by	a	dismal
death.	So,	taking	my	black	ship	and	with	my	companions,
270	I	have	come	for	news	of	my	father	who	has	been	so	long	absent.’
Then	godlike	Theoklymenos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘So	I	too	am	out	of	my	country,	because	I	have	killed
a	man	of	my	tribe,	but	he	had	many	brothers	and	relatives
in	horse-pasturing	Argos,	with	great	power	among	the	Achaians.
275	Avoiding	death	at	the	hands	of	these	men	and	black	doom,	I	am	a	fugitive,
since	it	is	my	fate	to	be	a	wanderer
among	men.	Give	me	a	place	in	your	ship,	since	I	have	come	to	you	as	a
suppliant,	lest	they	kill	me;	for	now	I	think	they	are	after	me.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
280	‘I	will	not	willingly	thrust	you	away	from	my	balanced	ship.	Come,	then,
with	me.	There	you	will	be	entertained,	from	what	we	have	left.’
So	Telemachos	spoke,	and	took	the	bronze	spear	from	him,
and	laid	it	at	length	upon	the	deck	of	the	oarswept	vessel.
Then	he	himself	mounted	on	board	the	seagoing	vessel
285	and	took	his	seat	on	the	stern	deck,	and	next	him	he	seated
Theoklymenos,	and	now	the	men	cast	off	the	stern	cables.
Telemachos	then	gave	the	sign	and	urged	his	companions
to	lay	hold	of	the	tackle,	and	they	listened	to	his	urging,
and	raising	the	mast	pole	made	of	fir	they	set	it	upright
290	in	the	hollow	hole	in	the	box,	and	made	it	fast	with	forestays,	and	with
halyards	strongly	twisted	of	leather	pulled	up	the	white	sails.
The	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	sent	them	a	favoring	stern	wind
blustering	stormily	through	the	bright	air,	so	that	with	all	speed	the	ship
might	run	the	whole	of	her	course	through	the	sea's	salt	water.
taken	on	by	Telemachos
295	They	ran	past	
Krounoi
,	and	past	
Chalkis
	on	the	fair	waters.
And	the	sun	set,	and	all	the	journeying	ways	were	darkened.
Pressing	on	before	the	wind	from	Zeus,	she	ran	past	
Pheai
,	and	on	past
shining	Elis,	where	the	Epeians	are	lords;	then
Telemachos	set	her	course	over	toward	the	Pointed	Islands,
300	as	he	pondered	whether	he	would	escape	death,	or	be	captured.
But	now	in	the	shelter	Odysseus	and	the	noble	swineherd
were	eating	their	evening	meal,	and	the	rest	of	the	men	with	them.
But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	Odysseus
spoke	to	them,	making	trial	of	the	swineherd,	to	see	305	if	he	was	truly	his
friend	and	would	invite	him	to	stay	on
in	his	steading	as	he	was,	or	would	urge	him	to	go	to	the	city:	‘Hear	me
now,	Eumaios,	and	all	you	other	companions.
I	am	very	eager	to	make	my	way	at	dawn	to	the	city
and	beg	there,	so	I	will	not	wear	you	out,	and	your	men.	Only	310	advise
me	well,	and	send	a	good	guide	to	go	along	with	me
and	see	me	there.	Once	in	the	town	I	must	even	go	begging
in	my	need,	for	someone	to	hand	me	a	bit	of	bread	or	a	cupful.
Then	I	would	go	into	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus
with	a	message	for	circumspect	Penelope,	to	tell	her;
315	and	I	would	mingle	with	the	overbearing	suitors,	to	see
if	they,	who	have	good	things	in	great	numbers,	would	give	me	a	dinner.
Soon	I	would	do	good	work	for	them,	whatever	they	wanted.
For	I	tell	you	this,	listen	to	me	and	understand	me:
by	grace	of	Hermes,	the	guide,	who	dispenses	glory
320	and	beauty	upon	the	endeavors	of	all	men,	I	am	such	a	one
for	work	with	my	hands	that	no	other	man	alive	could	compete
with	me	for	building	a	good	fire,	for	splitting	up	kindling,
for	carving	the	meat	or	roasting	the	meat	or	filling	the	wine	cups,	for	all
such	work	as	meaner	men	bestow	on	their	betters.’
325	Then,	deeply	troubled,	you	said	to	him,	O	swineherd	Eumaios:	‘O	my
guest,	what	is	this	idea	that	has	come	now	into	your	head?	Are	you	utterly
bent	on	achieving	your	own	destruction	there,	if	you	mean	to	lose	yourself
in	that	swarm	of	suitors
whose	outrageous	violence	goes	up	into	the	iron
330	sky?	For	nothing	like	you	are	the	serving	men	who	work	for	them,	but
young	men,	and	well	dressed	in	mantles	and	tunics,	always	with	neat	oiled
heads	and	handsome	faces.	These	are	the	people	who	serve	under	the
suitors,	and	their	well-polished	tables
Life	story	of	Eumaios
are	heavily	loaded	with	bread	and	meats	and	wine.	No,	rather
335	stay	here.	There	is	none	here	who	is	annoyed	by	your	presence,	neither
myself	nor	any	companion	whom	I	have	with	me.
When,	however,	the	dear	son	of	Odysseus	comes	back,
he	will	give	you	a	mantle	and	tunic	to	wear	as	clothing,
and	send	you	wherever	your	heart	and	spirit	desire	to	be	sent.’
340	Then	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘I	wish,
Eumaios,	you	could	be	as	dear	to	our	father	Zeus	as	to	me,	since	you
stopped	my	wandering	and	my	terrible	sorrow.	There	is	nothing	worse	for
mortal	men	than	the	vagrant	life,	but	still	for	the	sake	of	the	cursed
stomach	people
345	endure	hard	sorrows,	when	roving	and	pain	and	grief	befall	them.
But	now,	since	you	keep	such	a	man	as	I	am,	and	bid	me	stay	here,	come
then,	tell	me	about	the	mother	of	godlike	Odysseus,
and	his	father,	whom	when	he	went	he	left	on	the	doorsill
of	old	age.	Are	they	still	alive	in	the	beams	of	the	sunlight,	350	or	are	they
dead	by	now	and	gone	to	the	house	of	Hades?’
The	swineherd,	leader	of	men,	then	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘So,	my	friend	and	guest,	I	will	give	you	an	accurate	answer.
Laertes	is	still	alive,	but	all	the	time	he	is	praying
to	Zeus	that	the	spirit	will	leave	his	body	in	his	own	palace;	355	for	terribly
he	mourns	over	the	son	who	is	absent,
and	for	his	wedded	virtuous	wife,	whose	death	has	hurt	him
more	than	all	else,	and	gave	him	to	a	green	untimely
old	age.	She	died	of	grieving	over	her	glorious	son,	by
a	dismal	death;	I	hope	that	no	friend	who	lives	here	with	me
360	dies	such	a	death,	nor	any	who	does	me	the	acts	of	friendship.
Now	while	she	was	still	alive,	in	spite	of	her	grieving,
it	was	my	pleasure	to	try	her	out	and	to	ask	her	questions,
because	she	brought	me	up	along	with	her	stately	daughter,
Ktimene
	of	the	light	robes,	the	youngest	child.	We	two	365	grew	up
together,	and	I	was	only	a	little	less	favored.
But	when	we	had	both	arrived	at	our	lovely	prime,	they	gave	her	away	for
marriage,	in	Same,	and	for	her	were	given	numberless	gifts;	but	the	lady
gave	me	a	mantle	and	tunic,	excellent
clothing	she	put	upon	me,	and	giving	me	sandals	for	my	feet
370	sent	me	to	the	estate.	From	the	heart	she	loved	me	dearly.
Now	I	go	lacking	all	these	things,	but	the	blessed	immortals
prosper	all	the	work	that	I	myself	do	abiding
once	a	king's	son
here,	whence	I	eat	and	drink	and	give	to	people	I	honor;
but	there	is	no	sweet	occasion	now	to	hear	from	my	mistress
375	in	word	or	fact,	since	the	evil	has	fallen	upon	our	household,	these
overbearing	men,	and	greatly	the	serving	people
miss	the	talk	in	their	mistress'	presence,	the	asking	of	questions	and	eating
and	drinking	there,	then	something	to	take	home	with	them	to	the	country
—which	always	warms	the	hearts	of	the	serving	people.’
380	Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:	‘You	must
have	been	very	little	then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	when	you	wandered	far
away	from	your	own	country	and	your	parents.
But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
Was	there	some	storming	of	your	wide-wayed	city	of	people,
385	where	your	father	and	the	lady	your	mother	lived,	or	were	you	caught
alone	beside	your	sheep	and	your	cattle?	And	was	it
enemy	men	who	carried	you	in	their	ships	and	sold	you
here	in	this	man's	house,	being	paid	a	fair	price	for	you?’
The	swineherd,	leader	of	men,	then	said	to	him	in	answer:
390	‘My	guest,	since	indeed	you	are	asking	me	all	these	questions,	listen	in
silence	and	take	your	pleasure,	and	sit	there	drinking	your	wine.	These
nights	are	endless,	and	a	man	can	sleep	through	them,	or	he	can	enjoy
listening	to	stories,	and	you	have	no	need
to	go	to	bed	before	it	is	time.	Too	much	sleep	is	only
395	a	bore.	And	of	the	others,	any	one	whose	heart	and	spirit
urge	him	can	go	outside	and	sleep,	and	then,	when	the	dawn	shows,
breakfast	first,	then	go	out	to	tend	the	swine	of	our	master.
But	we	two,	sitting	here	in	the	shelter,	eating	and	drinking,	shall	entertain
each	other	remembering	and	retelling
400	our	sad	sorrows.	For	afterwards	a	man	who	has	suffered
much	and	wandered	much	has	pleasure	out	of	his	sorrows.
So	I	will	tell	you	now	the	answer	to	all	your	questions.
There	is	an	island,	called	
Syria
,	you	may	have	heard	of	it,	lying	above
Ortygia,	where	the	sun	makes	his	turnings;
405	not	so	much	a	populous	island,	but	a	good	one,	good	for
cattle	and	good	for	sheep,	full	of	vineyards,	and	wheat	raising.
No	hunger	ever	comes	on	these	people,	nor	any	other
hateful	sickness,	of	such	as	befall	wretched	humanity;
but	when	the	generations	of	men	grow	old	in	the	city,
410	Apollo	of	the	silver	bow,	and	Artemis	with	him,
comes	with	a	visitation	of	painless	arrows,	and	kills	them.
Kidnapped	by	Phoenicians
There	are	two	cities,	and	everything	is	divided	between	them,	and	over
both	of	these	cities	there	was	one	king,	my	father,
Ktesios
,	
Ormenos
'	son,	in	the	likeness	of	the	immortals.
415	‘There	came	Phoenician	men,	famous	seafarers,	gnawers	at	other	men's
goods,	with	countless	pretty	things	stored	in	their	black	ship.
Now	in	my	father's	house	there	was	a	Phoenician	woman,
both	beautiful	and	tall,	and	skilled	in	glorious	handiwork,
and	yet	these	Phoenicians,	subtle	men	in	their	talk,	beguiled	her.
420	First	of	all,	when	she	went	out	washing,	one	of	them	lay	with	her	in	love's
embrace	by	the	hollow	ship,	which	for	female	women
is	a	heart's	beguilement,	even	for	the	one	who	is	a	skilled	worker.
Then	he	asked	her	who	and	whence	she	was.	She	readily
told	them	all	about	the	high-roofed	house	of	her	father:
425	“I	claim	that	I	come	from	Sidon,	rich	in	bronze;	I	am	daughter	of	
Arybas
,
who	has	rivers	of	wealth,	but	men	from	Taphos,	pirates,	caught	me	and
carried	me	away	as	I	came	back
home	from	the	fields,	and	carried	me	to	this	place	and	sold	me	here	in	this
man's	house,	being	paid	a	fair	price	for	me.”
430	‘Then	the	man	who	had	lain	with	her	secretly	said	to	her:	“Would	you
then	be	willing	to	go	back	home	again	with	us,	to	see	once	more	the	high-
roofed	house	of	your	father	and	mother	and	themselves	too?	For	they	are
still	alive,	and	called	wealthy.”
‘Then	in	turn	the	woman	answered	them	and	said	to	them:
435	“That	also	could	be	done	if	you,	sailors,	were	willing
to	assure	me	by	an	oath	that	you	would	take	me	home	safely.”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	all	of	them	swore	to	this,	as	she	asked	them.
But	when	they	had	sworn	the	oath,	and	made	an	end	of	their	swearing,	then
once	again	the	woman	spoke	to	them	and	said	to	them:
440	“Silence,	now.	None	of	your	companions	must	say	anything
to	me,	when	he	happens	to	meet	me	in	the	street,	or	else
perhaps	at	the	spring;	somebody	might	go	to	the	house	and	tell	it	to	the	old
man,	and	he	might	be	suspicious,	and	bind	me
in	painful	bondage,	and	plan	destruction	against	the	rest	of	you.
445	But	keep	the	word	in	your	hearts,	and	get	on	with	buying	your	homeward
cargo.	But	when	your	ship	is	loaded	with	goods,	then	let	there	be	someone
sent	to	me	at	the	house	with	word	of	it,	quickly.
For	I	will	bring	you	gold,	whatever	I	can	lay	my	hand	on.
And	there	is	another	thing	I	would	willingly	give	you,	to	pay	for
and	a	treacherous	nurse	and	sold
450	my	way	home.	I	am	nurse	to	the	man's	son	in	his	place,
such	a	cunning	child,	as	he	runs	around	outside.	If	I
could	take	him	aboard	your	ship,	he	would	bring	you	a	price	beyond
counting,	wherever	you	might	sell	him	among	alien-speaking	people.”
‘So	she	spoke,	and	went	away	back	to	the	splendid	palace,
455	and	they,	with	their	hollow	ship,	for	the	whole	of	a	year	remaining	in	our
country,	traded	and	piled	up	much	substance.
But	when	at	last	their	hollow	ship	was	loaded	for	sailing,
they	sent	their	messenger,	to	bring	the	news	to	the	woman.
There	came	a	knowledgeable	man	to	the	house	of	my	father,
460	with	a	golden	necklace,	and	it	was	strung	with	pieces	of	amber.
Now	in	the	hall	the	serving	women	with	the	lady	my	mother
were	turning	it	in	their	hands	and	eying	it	and	offering
to	buy	it,	and	the	man	nodded	silently	to	the	woman,	then
after	nodding	to	her	he	went	away	to	the	hollow
465	ship,	and	she	took	my	hand	and	led	me	out	of	the	palace.
There	in	the	forecourt	she	came	upon	the	cups	and	the	tables
of	men	who	had	been	feasting,	associates	of	my	father,
but	these	had	gone	to	a	session	and	debate	of	the	people.
She	snatched	three	goblets	and	hid	them	in	the	fold	of	her	bosom,	470	and
carried	them	off,	and	I	in	my	innocence	went	with	her.
And	the	sun	set,	and	all	the	journeying	ways	were	darkened.
Walking	fast,	we	made	our	way	to	the	glorious	harbor,
where	lay	the	fast-running	ship	of	the	men	from	Phoenicia.
They	then	putting	out	went	over	the	ways	of	the	water
475	after	taking	us	aboard,	and	Zeus	sent	a	wind	to	follow.
Thus	it	was	that	for	six	days,	night	and	day,	we	sailed	on,
but	when	Zeus,	son	of	Kronos,	had	brought	on	the	seventh
day,	Artemis	of	the	showering	arrows	struck	down	the	woman,
and	she	dropped	with	a	splash,	like	a	diving	tern,	in	the	hull's	bilge.	They
then	480	threw	her	overboard	to	be	the	spoil	of	the	fishes
and	seals,	while	I	was	left	alone,	heart	full	of	sorrow;
and	the	wind	and	the	current	carried	the	men	and	brought	them	to	Ithaka,
where	Laertes	bought	me	for	himself	with	his	own	possessions.
Thus	it	was	that	I	came	to	set	eyes	on	this	country.’
485	In	turn	illustrious	Odysseus	gave	him	an	answer:	‘Eumaios,	you	have
deeply	stirred	the	spirit	within	me
Arrival	of	Telemachos	on	Ithaka
by	telling	me	all	these	things,	the	sorrows	your	heart	has	suffered.
But	beside	the	sorrow	Zeus	has	placed	some	good	for	you,	seeing	that	after
much	suffering	you	came	into	the	house	of	a	kindly	490	man,	who,	as	he
ought	to	do,	provides	you	with	victuals
and	drink,	and	the	life	you	lead	is	a	good	one.	But	I	come	to	you	only	after
much	wandering	in	the	cities	of	people.’
So	now	these	two	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,
then	slept,	but	not	for	very	much	time,	only	for	a	little,
495	since	soon	the	glorious	dawn	came	on.	Ashore,	Telemachos'
companions	now	loosened	the	sails,	and	took	down	the	mast	tree,	easily,
and	rowed	her	in	with	oars	to	the	mooring.
They	threw	over	the	anchor	stones	and	made	fast	the	stern	cables,	and
themselves	stepped	out	onto	the	break	of	the	sea	beach,
500	and	then	made	ready	their	dinner,	and	mixed	the	bright	wine	with	water.
But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	then	the
thoughtful	Telemachos	began	their	discourse:
‘The	rest	of	you	now	take	the	black	ship	on	to	the	city,
while	I	go	out	to	visit	the	estate	and	the	herdsmen.
505	In	the	evening,	when	I	have	looked	at	the	holdings,	I	will	come	back	to
town.	I	will	set	a	good	feast	before	you,	meats	and	sweet-tasting	wine,	to
be	my	thanks	for	sharing	the	journey	with	me.’
Then	in	turn	godlike	Theoklymenos	said	to	him:
‘Where	shall	I	go	then,	dear	child?	Of	the	men	who	are	lords	here	510	in
rocky	Ithaka,	who	is	there	whose	house	I	can	visit?
Or	shall	I	go	straight	to	the	house	where	you	live,	and	to	your	mother?’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Were	things	otherwise,	indeed	I	would	urge	you	to	visit
our	house;	we	lack	no	means	as	hosts,	and	yet	for	yourself
515	it	would	be	worse,	for	I	shall	be	absent,	nor	will	my	mother	see	you;	with
suitors	there	in	the	house	she	does	not	often
appear,	but	stays	in	the	upper	room	and	works	at	her	weaving.
But	I	will	indicate	another	man	you	could	go	to,
Eurymachos,	the	glorious	son	of	prudent	Polybos,
520	whom	now	the	people	of	Ithaka	look	on	as	on	divinity,
since	he	is	their	best	man	by	far,	and	is	the	most	eager
to	marry	my	mother	and	seize	the	rights	and	powers	of	Odysseus;	but	Zeus
the	Olympian,	dwelling	in	the	high	air,	knows	whether	the	evil	day	will
end	him	before	he	can	make	that	marriage.’
525	As	he	spoke,	a	bird	flew	by	on	the	right,	a	falcon,
Theoklymenos	reads	a	portent
swift	messenger	of	Apollo,	and	in	his	claws	he	carried	a	pigeon	and	tore	at
it	so	that	a	shower	of	feathers	drifted	to	the	ground	between	the	ship	and
Telemachos.
Theoklymenos	called	him	away	from	his	other	companions
530	and	took	him	by	the	hand	and	spoke	and	named	him,	saying:
‘Telemachos,	not	without	a	god's	will	did	this	bird	fly	past	you	on	the	right,
for	I	knew	when	I	saw	it	that	it	was	a	portent.
No	other	family	shall	be	kinglier	than	yours	in	the	country
of	Ithaka,	but	you	shall	have	lordly	power	forever.’
535	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘If	only	this	word,
stranger	and	guest,	were	brought	to	fulfillment,	soon	you	would	be	aware
of	my	love	and	many	gifts	given
by	me,	so	any	man	who	met	you	would	call	you	blessed.’
He	spoke,	and	said	a	word	to	Peiraios,	a	faithful	companion:
540	‘
Peiraios
,	son	of	
Klytios
,	in	other	ways	also	you	follow	my	will,	beyond
the	other	friends	who	went	with	me	to	Pylos.
So	now	too	take	this	guest	home	to	your	house	and	give	him
his	honor	due	and	loving	attention,	until	I	come	to	you.’
So	he	spoke,	and	spear-famed	Peiraios	gave	him	an	answer:
545	‘Telemachos,	even	if	you	were	to	stay	out	there	for	a	long	time,	we	shall
lack	no	means	as	hosts	to	this	man,	and	I	shall	look	after	him.’
So	speaking	he	went	aboard	the	ship	and	told	his	companions
also	to	go	aboard,	and	to	cast	off	the	stern	cables,
and	quickly	they	went	aboard	the	ships	and	sat	to	the	oarlocks;	550	but
under	his	feet	Telemachos	bound	on	his	fair	sandals,
and	then	caught	up	a	powerful	spear,	edged	with	sharp	bronze,	from	the
ship's	deck,	but	the	other	men	cast	off	the	stern	cables,	and	pushed	off	and
sailed	away	to	the	city,	as	they	were	asked	to	by	Telemachos,	beloved	son
of	godlike	Odysseus.
555	He	stepped	out,	and	his	feet	took	him	swiftly,	until	he	came	to	the	yard,
where	there	were	countless	pigs,	and	near	them	always	slept	the	noble
swineherd,	with	kind	thoughts	for	his	masters.
BOOK	XVI
These	two	in	the	shelter,	Odysseus	and	the	noble
swineherd,	stirred	the	fire	at	dawn,	and	arranged	their	breakfast,	and	sent
the	herdsmen	out	with	the	pasturing	pigs.	At	this	time	the	clamorous	dogs
came	fawning	around	Telemachos,	nor	did	5	they	bark	at	him	as	he	came,
and	great	Odysseus	noticed
that	the	dogs	were	fawning;	above	them	he	heard	the	loud	noise	of
footsteps.
Immediately	he	spoke	in	winged	words	to	Eumaios:
‘Eumaios,	someone	is	on	his	way	here	who	is	truly
one	of	yours,	or	else	well	known,	since	the	dogs	are	not	barking	10	but
fawning	about	him,	and	I	can	hear	the	thud	of	his	footsteps.’
His	whole	word	had	not	been	spoken	when	his	beloved
son	stood	in	the	forecourt.	Amazed,	the	swineherd	started	up,	and	the
vessels,	where	he	had	been	busily	mixing
the	bright	wine,	fell	from	his	hand.	He	came	up	to	meet	his	master,	15	and
kissed	his	head,	and	kissed	too	his	beautiful	shining	eyes,	and	both	his
hands,	and	the	swelling	tear	fell	from	him.
And	as	a	father,	with	heart	full	of	love,	welcomes	his	only	and	grown	son,
for	whose	sake	he	has	undergone	many	hardships	when	he	comes	back	in
the	tenth	year	from	a	distant	country,	20	so	now	the	noble	swineherd,
clinging	fast	to	godlike
Telemachos,	kissed	him	even	as	if	he	had	escaped	dying,
and	in	a	burst	of	weeping	he	spoke	to	him	in	winged	words:	‘You	have
come,	Telemachos,	sweet	light;	I	thought	I	would	never
Telemachos	finds	Odysseus	and	Eumaios
see	you	again,	when	you	had	gone	in	the	ship	to	Pylos.
25	But	come	now	into	the	house,	dear	child,	so	that	I	can	pleasure	my	heart
with	looking	at	you	again	when	you	are	inside;
for	you	do	not	come	very	often	to	the	estate	and	the	herdsmen,	but	you	stay
in	town,	since	now	it	seems	you	are	even	minded	to	face	the	deadly
company	of	the	lordly	suitors.’
30	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘So	it	shall	be,	my
father;	but	it	was	for	your	sake	I	came	here,	to	look	upon	you	with	my
eyes,	and	to	hear	a	word	from	you,	whether	my	mother	endures	still	in	the
halls,	or	whether
some	other	man	has	married	her,	and	the	bed	of	Odysseus
35	lies	forlorn	of	sleepers	with	spider	webs	grown	upon	it.’
Then	in	turn	the	swineherd,	leader	of	men,	said	to	him:
‘All	too	much	with	enduring	heart	she	does	wait	for	him
there	in	your	own	palace,	and	always	with	her	the	wretched	nights	and	the
days	also	waste	her	away	with	weeping.’
40	So	he	spoke,	and	took	the	bronze	spear	from	him.	Telemachos	then	went
inside	and	stepped	over	the	sill	of	stone,	and	his	father	Odysseus	rose
from	his	seat	and	yielded	him	place	as	he	entered,	but	Telemachos	from
the	other	side	checked	him	and	said	to	him:	‘No,	sit,	my	friend,	and	we
shall	find	us	another	seat,	here	45	in	our	own	shelter;	the	man	is	here	who
will	lay	it	for	us.’
He	spoke,	and	Odysseus	went	back	again	and	sat	down.	The	swineherd
strewed	green	brushwood	and	fleeces	on	the	ground	for	him.	There	the
beloved	son	of	Odysseus	seated	himself,	and	for	them
the	swineherd	brought	and	set	beside	them	platters	of	roasted	50	meat,
which	they	had	left	over	when	they	were	eating	earlier;	and	hastily	set
bread	by	them,	piling	it	in	baskets,
and	mixed	the	wine,	as	sweet	as	honey,	in	a	bowl	of	ivy.
He	himself	sat	down	across	from	godlike	Odysseus.
They	put	forth	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
55	But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	then	at
last	Telemachos	questioned	the	noble	swineherd:
‘Father,	where	did	this	stranger	come	from?	How	did	the	sailors	bring	him
to	Ithaka?	What	men	do	they	claim	that	they	are?
For	I	do	not	think	he	could	have	traveled	on	foot	to	this	country.’
60	Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘So,	my	child,	I
will	relate	you	the	whole	true	story.
He	announces	himself	by	birth	to	be	one	from	spacious
Troubles	in	Ithaka	described
Crete,	but	his	wanderings	have	wheeled	him	through	many	cities	of	mortal
men,	for	so	the	divinity	spun	his	thread	for	him,	65	and	now	this	time	he
has	fled	away	off	a	ship	of	Thesprotian	men,	and	come	to	my	steading.	I
put	him	into	your	hands	now.
Do	with	him	as	you	will.	He	names	himself	your	suppliant.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Eumaios,	this	word	you	spoke	hurt	my	heart	deeply.	For	how	70	shall	I
take	and	entertain	a	stranger	guest	in	my	house?
I	myself	am	young	and	have	no	faith	in	my	hands'	strength	to	defend	a
man,	if	anyone	else	picks	a	quarrel	with	him;	and	my	mother's	heart	is
divided	in	her,	and	ponders	two	ways,	whether	to	remain	here	with	me,	and
look	after	the	household,	75	keep	faith	with	her	husband's	bed,	and	regard
the	voice	of	the	people,	or	go	away	at	last	with	the	best	man	of	the
Achaians
who	pays	her	court	in	her	palace,	and	brings	her	the	most	presents.
But	as	for	this	stranger,	since	it	is	your	house	he	has	come	to,	I	will	give
him	a	mantle	and	tunic	to	wear,	fine	clothing,	80	and	give	him	sandals	for
his	feet,	a	sword	with	two	edges,	and	send	him	wherever	his	heart	and
spirit	desire	to	be	sent.
Or	if	you	will,	keep	him	here	in	your	steading	and	look	after	him,	and	I
will	send	the	clothes	out	here,	and	all	provisions
to	eat,	so	he	will	not	be	hard	on	you,	nor	on	your	companions;	85	but	I	will
not	let	him	go	down	there	and	be	where	the	suitors	are,	for	their
outrageousness	is	too	strong,	and	I	fear
they	may	insult	him,	and	that	will	be	a	hard	sorrow	upon	me	and	a	difficult
one	for	even	a	strong	man	to	deal	with
among	too	many	of	them,	since	they	will	be	far	the	stronger.’
90	Then	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	spoke	to	him	in	answer:	‘Dear	friend,
since	in	truth	I	am	privileged	to	speak	of	this,	you	eat	away	the	dear	heart
in	me,	as	I	listen
to	what	you	tell	of	the	suitors	and	their	reckless	contrivings	inside	your
palace,	against	your	will,	when	you	are	such	a	one	95	as	you	are.	Tell	me,
are	you	willingly	oppressed	by	them?	Do	the	people	hate	you	throughout
this	place,	swayed	by	some	impulse	given	from	the	gods?	Do	you	find	your
brothers	wanting?	A	man	trusts	help	from	these	in	the	fighting	when	a
great	quarrel	arises.
I	wish	that	I	were	truly	as	young	as	I	am	in	spirit,
100	or	a	son	of	stately	Odysseus	were	here,	or	he	himself	might	come	in	from
his	wandering.	There	is	time	still	for	hope.	If	such
Eumaios	sent	to	Penelope
things	could	be,	another	could	strike	my	head	from	my	shoulders	if	I	did
not	come	as	an	evil	thing	to	all	those	people
as	I	entered	the	palace	of	Odysseus,	the	son	of	Laertes.
105	And	if	I,	fighting	alone,	were	subdued	by	all	their	number,	then	I	would
rather	die,	cut	down	in	my	own	palace,
than	have	to	go	on	watching	forever	these	shameful	activities,	guests	being
battered	about,	or	to	see	them	rudely	mishandling	the	serving	women	all
about	the	beautiful	palace,
110	to	see	them	drawing	the	wine	and	eating	up	food	in	this	utterly	reckless
way,	without	end,	forever	and	always	at	it.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘So,	my	friend,	I	will	tell	you	plainly	the	whole	truth	of	it.
It	is	not	that	all	the	people	hate	me,	nor	are	they	angry,	115	nor	is	it	that	I
find	brothers	wanting,	whom	a	man	trusts	for	help	in	the	fighting,
whenever	a	great	quarrel	arises.
For	so	it	is	that	the	son	of	Kronos	made	ours	a	single
line.	
Arkeisios
	had	only	a	single	son,	Laertes,	and	Laertes	had	only	one
son,	Odysseus;	Odysseus	in	turn
120	left	only	one	son,	myself,	in	the	halls,	and	got	no	profit	of	me,	and	my
enemies	are	here	in	my	house,	beyond	numbering.
For	all	the	greatest	men	who	have	the	power	in	the	islands,	in	Doulichion
and	Same	and	in	wooded	Zakynthos,
and	all	who	in	rocky	Ithaka	are	holders	of	lordships,
125	all	these	are	after	my	mother	for	marriage,	and	wear	my	house	out.
And	she	does	not	refuse	the	hateful	marriage,	nor	is	she	able	to	make	an
end	of	the	matter;	and	these	eating	up	my	substance	waste	it	away;	and
soon	they	will	break	me	myself	to	pieces.
Yet	all	these	are	things	that	are	lying	upon	the	gods'	knees.
130	Father	Eumaios,	go	quickly	now,	and	tell	the	circumspect	Penelope	that	I
am	safe	and	have	come	from	Pylos.
I	myself	will	stay	here.	You	go	there	quickly,	and	give	this	message	to	her
alone,	and	let	no	other	Achaian
hear	it;	for	there	are	many	there	who	are	plotting	against	me.’
135	Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘I	see,	I
understand;	you	speak	to	one	who	follows	you.
But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
Shall	I	on	the	same	errand	go	with	the	news	to	wretched
Laertes,	who	while	he	so	greatly	grieved	for	Odysseus
140	yet	would	look	after	his	farm	and	with	the	thralls	in	his	household
Odysseus	reveals	himself
would	eat	and	drink,	whenever	the	spirit	was	urgent	with	him;	but	now,
since	you	went	away	in	the	ship	to	Pylos,
they	say	he	has	not	eaten	in	this	way,	nor	drunk	anything,	nor	looked	to	his
farm,	but	always	in	lamentation	and	mourning	145	sits	grieving,	and	the
flesh	on	his	bones	is	wasting	from	him.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Though	it	hurts	the	more,	we	shall	let	him	be,	for	all	our	sorrow.
For	if	it	were	somehow	given	to	mortals	to	have	their	choosing	in	all
things,	we	should	choose	my	father's	day	of	homecoming.
150	But	you,	when	you	have	given	your	message,	come	back	and	do	not	go
off	to	the	estate	to	see	him,	but	tell	my	mother
to	tell	the	servant	who	is	housekeeper	to	go	there	swiftly	and	secretly,	and
she	can	give	the	news	to	the	old	man.’
He	spoke,	and	started	the	swineherd,	who	in	his	hands	took	up
155	his	sandals	and	tied	them	on	his	feet	to	start	for	the	city.
Nor	was	Athene	unaware	that	Eumaios	the	swineherd
had	left	the	steading,	but	she	came	near,	likened	to	a	woman	beautiful	and
tall,	and	skilled	in	glorious	handiwork,
and	stood	in	the	forecourt	of	the	shelter,	seen	by	Odysseus.
160	But	Telemachos	did	not	look	her	way	nor	did	he	perceive	her;	for	the	gods
do	not	show	themselves	in	this	way	to	everyone;	but	Odysseus	saw	her
and	the	dogs	did;	they	were	not	barking,	but	cowered	away,	whimpering,
to	the	other	side	of	the	shelter.
She	nodded	to	him	with	her	brows,	and	noble	Odysseus
165	saw	her,	and	came	from	the	house,	outside	the	great	wall	of	the	courtyard,
and	stood	in	her	presence.	Then	Athene	spoke	to	him,	saying:	‘Son	of
Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
it	is	time	now	to	tell	your	son	the	story;	no	longer
hide	it,	so	that,	contriving	death	and	doom	for	the	suitors,	170	you	two	may
go	to	the	glorious	city.	I	myself	shall	not
be	long	absent	from	you	in	my	eagerness	for	the	fighting.’
So	spoke	Athene,	and	with	her	golden	wand	she	tapped	him.
First	she	made	the	mantle	and	the	tunic	that	covered
his	chest	turn	bright	and	clean;	she	increased	his	strength	and	stature.
175	His	dark	color	came	back	to	him	again,	his	jaws	firmed,
and	the	beard	that	grew	about	his	chin	turned	black.	Athene	went	away
once	more,	having	done	her	work,	but	Odysseus
went	back	into	the	shelter.	His	beloved	son	was	astonished	and	turned	his
eyes	in	the	other	direction,	fearing	this	must	be
to	Telemachos
180	a	god,	and	spoke	aloud	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:
‘Suddenly	you	have	changed,	my	friend,	from	what	you	were	formerly;
your	skin	is	no	longer	as	it	was,	you	have	other	clothing.
Surely	you	are	one	of	the	gods	who	hold	the	high	heaven.
Be	gracious,	then:	so	we	shall	give	you	favored	offerings	185	and	golden
gifts	that	have	been	well	wrought.	Only	be	merciful.’
Then	in	turn	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	answered	him:
‘No,	I	am	not	a	god.	Why	liken	me	to	the	immortals?
But	I	am	your	father,	for	whose	sake	you	are	always	grieving	as	you	look
for	violence	from	others,	and	endure	hardships.’
190	So	he	spoke,	and	kissed	his	son,	and	the	tears	running	down	his	cheeks
splashed	on	the	ground.	Until	now,	he	was	always	unyielding.
But	Telemachos,	for	he	did	not	yet	believe	that	this	was
his	father,	spoke	to	him	once	again	in	answer,	saying:
‘No,	you	are	not	Odysseus	my	father,	but	some	divinity
195	beguiles	me,	so	that	I	must	grieve	the	more,	and	be	sorry.
For	no	man	who	was	mortal	could	ever	have	so	contrived	it	by	his	own
mind	alone,	not	unless	some	immortal,	descending	on	him	in	person,	were
lightly	to	make	him	a	young	or	an	old	man.
For	even	now	you	were	an	old	man	in	unseemly	clothing,
200	but	now	you	resemble	one	of	the	gods	who	hold	wide	heaven.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Telemachos,	it	does	not	become	you	to	wonder	too	much
at	your	own	father	when	he	is	here,	nor	doubt	him.	No	other	Odysseus	than
I	will	ever	come	back	to	you.	But	here	I	am,	205	and	I	am	as	you	see	me,
and	after	hardships	and	suffering	much	I	have	come,	in	the	twentieth	year,
back	to	my	own	country.
But	here	you	see	the	work	of	Athene,	the	giver	of	plunder,	who	turns	me
into	whatever	she	pleases,	since	she	can	do	this;	and	now	she	will	make	me
look	like	a	beggar,	but	then	the	next	time	210	like	a	young	man,	and
wearing	splendid	clothes	on	my	body;	and	it	is	a	light	thing	for	the	gods
who	hold	wide	heaven	to	glorify	any	mortal	man,	or	else	to	degrade	him.’
So	he	spoke,	and	sat	down	again,	but	now	Telemachos
folded	his	great	father	in	his	arms	and	lamented,
215	shedding	tears,	and	desire	for	mourning	rose	in	both	of	them;	and	they
cried	shrill	in	a	pulsing	voice,	even	more	than	the	outcry	of	birds,	ospreys
or	vultures	with	hooked	claws,	whose	children
They	make	their	plans
were	stolen	away	by	the	men	of	the	fields,	before	their	wings	grew	strong;
such	was	their	pitiful	cry	and	the	tears	their	eyes	wept.
220	And	now	the	light	of	the	sun	would	have	set	on	their	crying,	had	not
Telemachos	spoken	a	quick	word	to	his	father:
‘What	kind	of	ship	was	it,	father	dear,	in	which	the	sailors	brought	you	to
Ithaka?	What	men	do	they	claim	that	they	are?
For	I	do	not	think	you	could	have	traveled	on	foot	to	this	country.’
225	Then	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘So,	my	child,
I	will	tell	you	all	the	truth.	The	Phaiakians	famed	for	seafaring	brought	me
here,	and	they	carry	other	people	as	well,	whoever	may	come	into	their
country.
They	brought	me	sleeping	in	their	fast	ship	over	the	open	230	sea,	and	set
me	down	in	Ithaka,	and	gave	me	glorious
gifts,	abundant	bronze	and	gold	and	woven	apparel.
All	this,	by	the	gods'	grace,	is	lying	stored	in	the	caverns.
But	now	I	have	come	to	this	place	by	the	advice	by	Athene,	so	we	together
can	make	our	plans	to	slaughter	our	enemies.
235	Come	then,	tell	me	the	number	of	suitors,	and	tell	me	about	them,	so	I	can
know	how	many	there	are,	and	which	men	are	of	them;	and	then,	when	I
have	pondered	it	in	my	faultless	mind,	I	can	decide	whether	we	two	alone
will	be	able	to	face	them
without	any	help,	or	whether	we	must	go	looking	for	others.’
240	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘Oh,	father,	I	have
always	heard	of	your	great	fame,	and	how	you	were	a	fighting	man	with
your	hands,	and	prudent	in	counsel;	but	what	you	have	spoken	of	is	too
big;	I	am	awed;	for	it	could	not	be	that	two	men	could	fight	against	strong
men	in	these	numbers.
245	The	suitors	are	no	simple	number	of	ten,	nor	twice	that,	but	far	more	than
that.	Even	now	you	shall	hear	the	number	of	those	that	are	here.	From
Doulichion	there	are	two	and	fifty	young	men,	choice	men,	and	there	are
six	thralls	of	their	following;	the	number	of	men	come	from	Same	is	four
and	twenty,
250	and	from	Zakynthos	there	are	twenty	sons	of	the	Achaians.
From	Ithaka	itself	there	are	twelve,	and	all	of	their	best	men,	and	Medon
the	herald	is	with	them,	and	the	divine	singer,	and	there	are	two	henchmen
with	them,	both	skilled	in	carving.	If	we	set	ourselves	to	fight	against	all
who	are	in	the	palace,	255	I	fear	your	revenge	on	their	violence	may	be
grim	and	bitter	for	us.	Then,	if	you	can	think	of	anyone	to	stand	by	us
to	deal	with	the	suitors
and	with	forthright	spirit	be	our	protector,	speak	of	him	to	me.’
Then	in	turn	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	answered	him:
‘So,	then,	I	will	tell	you.	Hear	me	and	understand	me
260	and	consider	whether	Athene	with	Zeus	father	helping	will	be	enough	for
us,	or	whether	I	must	think	of	some	other	helper.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Those	indeed	are	two	excellent	helpers	you	name	to	me,	even	though	they
sit	high	away	in	the	clouds,	for	they	have	power	265	over	others	besides,
over	mortal	men	and	the	gods	immortal.’
Then	in	turn	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	answered	him:
‘These	are	two	who	will	not	for	a	long	time	stay	far	off
from	the	strong	battle,	at	that	time	when	the	War	God's	decision	is	fought
out	in	our	halls	between	ourselves	and	the	suitors.
270	But	now,	as	for	you,	you	must	make	your	way,	when	dawn	shows,	back	to
our	house,	and	be	with	the	group	of	insolent	suitors.
At	a	later	time	the	swineherd	shall	take	me	to	the	city,
and	I	shall	look	like	a	dismal	vagabond,	and	an	old	man.
But	if	they	maltreat	me	within	the	house,	then	let	the	dear	heart	275	in	you
even	endure	it,	though	I	suffer	outrage,	even
if	they	drag	me	by	the	feet	through	the	palace	to	throw	me	out	of	it,	or	pelt
me	with	missiles;	you	must	still	look	on	and	endure	it;	though	indeed	you
may	speak	to	them	with	soft	words	and	entreat	them	to	give	over	their	mad
behavior,	but	still	they	will	never	280	listen	to	you,	for	the	day	of	their
destiny	stands	near	them.
And	put	away	in	your	heart	this	other	thing	that	I	tell	you.
When	Athene,	lady	of	many	counsels,	puts	it	into
my	mind,	I	will	nod	my	head	to	you,	and	when	you	perceive	it,	take	all	the
warlike	weapons	which	are	stored	in	the	great	hall,	285	and	carry	them	off
and	store	them	away	in	the	inward	corner	of	the	high	chamber;	and	when
the	suitors	miss	them	and	ask	you	about	them,	answer	and	beguile	them
with	soft	words,	saying:	“I	stored	them	away	out	of	the	smoke,	since	they
are	no	longer	like	what	Odysseus	left	behind	when	he	went	to	Troy	land,
290	but	are	made	foul,	with	all	the	smoke	of	the	fire	upon	them.
Also,	the	son	of	Kronos	put	into	my	head	this	even
greater	thought,	that	with	the	wine	in	you,	you	might	stand	up	and	fight,
and	wound	each	other,	and	spoil	the	feast	and	the	courting,	since	iron	all	of
itself	works	on	a	man	and	attracts	him.”
295	But	leave	behind,	for	you	and	me	alone,	a	pair	each
Return	of	the	suitors
of	swords	and	spears,	and	a	pair	of	oxhide	shields,	to	take	up	in	our	hands,
and	wield	them,	and	kill	these	men;	and	Zeus	of	the	counsels	and	Pallas
Athene	will	be	there	to	maze	the	wits	in	them.
And	put	away	in	your	heart	this	other	thing	that	I	tell	you.
300	If	truly	you	are	my	own	son,	and	born	of	our	own	blood,
then	let	nobody	hear	that	Odysseus	is	in	the	palace;
let	not	Laertes	hear	of	it,	neither	let	the	swineherd;
let	no	one	in	the	household	know,	not	even	Penelope
herself;	you	and	I	alone	will	judge	the	faith	of	the	women,	305	and,	besides
these,	we	can	make	trial	of	the	serving	men,	to	see	whether	any	of	them	is
true	to	us	and	full	of	humility,
or	whether	one	cares	nothing	for	you,	and	denies	your	greatness.’
Then	in	answer	again	his	glorious	son	said	to	him:
‘Father,	I	think	you	will	learn	what	my	spirit	is	like,	when	the	time	comes,
310	for	the	mood	that	is	in	my	mind	shows	no	slackening;	only	I	think	in
what	you	propose	there	will	be	no	profit	for	either	of	us,	and	I	urge	you	to
think	well	about	it.	You	would
be	going	about	our	holdings,	testing	and	learning	the	nature	of	man	after
man,	while	they	at	their	ease	in	the	palace
315	overbearingly	consume	our	goods,	and	spare	nothing.
And	yet	I	do	urge	you	to	find	out	about	the	women,
which	of	them	care	nothing	for	you,	and	which	are	innocent;	but	I	myself
would	not	wish	that	we	should	go	out	to	the	steadings	to	test	the	men,	but
this	is	a	task	to	be	left	for	later,	320	if	truly	you	have	been	given	some	sign
from	Zeus	of	the	aegis.’
Now	as	these	two	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,
the	well-made	vessel	which	had	carried	Telemachos,	together	with	his
companions,	from	Pylos,	now	came	in	to	Ithaka.
They,	when	they	were	inside	the	many-hollowed	harbor,
325	hauled	the	black-hulled	ship	onto	the	dry	land,	high	up,	and	their	high-
hearted	henchmen	carried	their	armor	for	them,	and	took	the	beautiful
presents	to	the	house	of	Klytios.
But	they	sent	a	herald	on	his	way	to	the	house	of	Odysseus	to	take	a
message	to	circumspect	Penelope,	saying
330	Telemachos	was	in	the	country	now,	but	had	told	them	to	sail	the	ship
back	to	the	city,	so	the	magnificent	queen	would	not	be	terrified	within	her
heart,	and	shed	the	soft	tears.
from	their	futile	ambush
The	two	of	them	met,	the	herald	and	noble	swineherd,	going	by	reason	of
the	same	message,	to	report	to	the	lady.
335	But	when	they	had	come	to	the	house	of	the	sacred	king,	the	herald	stood
in	the	midst	of	the	serving	maids	and	delivered	his	message:	‘Now,	O
queen,	your	beloved	son	is	back	in	this	country.’
But	the	swineherd	stood	very	close	to	Penelope	and	told	her	all	the
message	that	her	beloved	son	had	entrusted
340	to	him	to	tell,	but	when	he	had	given	her	all	the	message,	he	went	back	to
his	pigs,	leaving	the	palace	and	courtyard.
But	the	hearts	of	the	suitors	were	disturbed	and	discouraged.	They
went	out	of	the	palace	and	stood	by	the	great	wall	of	the	courtyard,	and
there	in	front	of	the	palace	gates	they	held	an	assembly.
345	First	of	them	to	speak	was	Eurymachos,	son	of	Polybos:
‘Friends,	this	is	a	monstrous	thing,	this	voyage	made	by	Telemachos	and
insolently	put	through.	We	thought	he	would	never	achieve	it.
But	come,	let	us	drag	a	black	ship,	our	best	one,	down	to	the	water,	and
assemble	sailors	to	row	it,	who	can	with	all	speed	carry	350	the	message	to
give	to	our	others	and	tell	them	to	come	home	quickly.’
He	had	not	yet	said	all	before	
Amphinomos
,	turning	from	his	place,
saw	the	ship	inside	the	depths	of	the	harbor,	and	they	had	the	oars	now	in
their	hands	and	were	taking	the	sails	down.
He	laughed	out	sweetly	and	spoke	a	word	then	to	his	companions:	355	‘We
need	send	them	no	message	now.	Here	they	are,	inside.
Either	some	god	told	it	to	them,	or	they	themselves	saw
the	other	ship	pass	by,	and	they	were	not	able	to	catch	her.’
He	spoke,	and	they	stood	up	and	went	down	to	the	sand	of	the
seashore,	and	others	hauled	their	black-hulled	ship	up	onto	the	dry	land,
360	and	their	high-hearted	henchmen	carried	their	armor	for	them.
They	went	in	a	throng	to	the	assembly,	nor	did	they	suffer	any	of	the	young
men	or	any	of	the	elders	to	sit	with	them.
Thereupon	Antinoös,	son	of	Eupeithes,	addressed	them:
‘It	is	shameful	how	the	gods	got	this	man	clear	of	misfortune.
365	In	the	daytime	we	sat	watchful	along	the	windy	headlands,	always
succeeding	each	other,	but	when	the	sun	set,	we	never	lay	through	the
night	on	the	dry	land,	but	always	on	the	open	water,	cruising	in	a	fast	ship,
we	waited	for	the	divine	dawn,	watching	to	ambush	Telemachos,	so	that
we	could	cut	him
Antinoös’	proposal	to	murder	Telemachos
370	off;	but	all	the	time	some	divinity	brought	him	home.	Therefore,	we	who
are	here	must	make	our	plans	for	the	grim	destruction	of	Telemachos,	so
he	cannot	escape	us;	since	I	have	no	thought	we	can	get	our	present
purpose	accomplished	while	he	is	living.
For	he	himself	is	understanding	in	thought	and	counsel,
375	and	the	people	here	no	longer	show	us	their	entire	favor.
But	come	now,	before	he	can	gather	the	Achaians	and	bring	them	to
assembly;	for	I	think	he	will	not	let	us	go,	but	work	out	his	anger,	and	stand
up	before	them	all	and	tell	them
how	we	designed	his	sudden	murder,	but	we	could	not	catch	him;	380	and
they	will	have	no	praise	for	us	when	they	hear	of	our	evil	deeds,	and	I	fear
they	will	work	some	evil	on	us,	and	drive	us	from	our	own	country,	so	we
must	make	for	another	community;	then	let	us	surprise	him	and	kill	him,	in
the	fields	away	from	the	city,	or	in	the	road,	and	ourselves	seize	his	goods
and	possessions,	385	dividing	them	among	ourselves	fairly,	but	give	his
palace	to	his	mother	to	keep	and	to	the	man	who	marries	her.	Or	else,	if
what	I	say	is	not	pleasing	to	you,	but	you	are	determined	to	have	him	go	on
living	and	keep	his	father's	inheritance,	then	we	must	not	go	on	gathering
here	and	abundantly	eating	390	away	his	fine	substance,	but	from	his	own
palace	each	man	must	strive	to	win	her	with	gifts	of	courtship;	she	will
then	marry	the	man	she	is	fated	to	have,	and	who	brings	her	the	greatest
presents.’
So	he	spoke,	and	all	of	them	stayed	stricken	to	silence.
Now	Amphinomos	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them.	He	was
395	the	shining	son	of	Nisos,	son	of	the	lord	Aretiades,
and	led	those	suitors	who	had	come	over	from	the	abundant	grasslands	and
grainlands	of	Doulichion,	and	pleased	Penelope	more	than	the	others	in
talk,	for	he	had	good	sense	and	discretion.
He	in	kind	intention	toward	all	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them:	400	‘Dear
friends,	I	for	my	part	would	not	be	willing	to	murder	Telemachos;	it	is
terrible	to	kill	one	of	royal
blood;	we	should	first	have	to	ask	the	gods	for	their	counsel.
Then,	if	the	ordinances	of	great	Zeus	approve	of	it,
I	myself	would	kill	him	and	tell	all	others	to	do	so;
405	but	I	say	we	must	give	it	up,	if	the	gods	deny	us.’
So	Amphinomos	spoke,	and	his	word	was	acceptable	to	them.
Then	they	stood	up	at	once	and	went	into	the	house	of	Odysseus,	and
entering	they	found	their	polished	chairs,	and	were	seated.
vetoed	by	Amphinomos
But	now	circumspect	Penelope	thought	of	her	next	move,
410	to	show	herself	to	her	overbearingly	violent	suitors;
for	she	had	heard	how	they	had	planned	her	son's	death	in	the	palace.
The	herald,	Medon,	who	overheard	their	planning,	had	told	her.
She	went	with	her	attendant	women	into	the	great	hall.
But	when	she,	shining	among	women,	came	to	the	suitors,
415	she	stood	by	the	pillar	that	supported	the	roof	with	its	joinery,	holding	her
shining	veil	in	front	of	her	face	to	shield	it,	and	spoke	a	word	of	reproach
to	Antinoös,	naming	him:
‘Antinoös,	violent	man,	deviser	of	evil:	in	Ithaka
the	common	account	says	you	are	the	best	man	among	your	age	mates	420
for	speech	and	counsel.	But	you	have	never	been	such.	Oh,	boisterous
creature,	why	do	you	weave	a	design	of	death	and	destruction	for
Telemachos,	and	take	no	heed	of	suppliants,	over	whom	Zeus	stands
witness?	It	is	not	right	to	plan	harm	for	each	other.
Do	you	not	know	how	your	father	came	here	once,	a	fugitive	425	in	fear	of
the	people?	These	were	terribly	angered	with	him,	because	he	had	thrown
in	his	lot	with	the	pirate	Taphians	and	harried	the	Thesprotians,	and	these
were	friends	of	our	people.
They	wanted	to	waste	him	away,	to	break	the	dear	heart	in	him,	to	eat	up
his	substance	and	abundant	livelihood.	Only
430	Odysseus	stayed	their	hand	and	held	them,	for	all	their	fury.
Now	you	eat	up	his	house	without	payment,	pay	court	to	his	wedded	wife,
try	to	murder	his	son,	and	do	me	great	indignity.
I	tell	you	to	stop	it,	and	ask	the	others	to	do	so	likewise.’
Eurymachos	the	son	of	Polybos	spoke	then	answering:
435	‘Daughter	of	Ikarios,	circumspect	Penelope,
do	not	fear.	Never	let	your	heart	be	troubled	for	these	things.
The	man	is	not	living,	nor	will	there	be	one,	nor	can	there	ever	be	one,	who
shall	lay	hands	upon	your	son,	Telemachos,
as	long	as	I	am	alive	on	earth	and	look	on	the	daylight.
440	For	I	tell	you	this	straight	out,	and	it	will	be	a	thing	accomplished:
instantly	his	own	black	blood	will	stain	my	spear	point.
My	own	spear;	since	often	Odysseus,	sacker	of	cities,
would	seat	me	also	upon	his	knees,	and	put	pieces	of	roasted	meat	in	my
hands,	and	hold	the	red	wine	out	to	me.	Therefore,	445	of	all	men
Telemachos	is	the	dearest	to	me
by	far,	and	I	tell	him	to	go	in	no	fear	of	destruction
from	the	suitors.	But	if	it	comes	from	the	gods,	there	is	no	escaping	it.’
Return	of	Eumaios
So	he	spoke,	encouraging	her,	but	himself	was	planning
the	murder.	She	went	back	to	the	shining	upper	chamber
450	and	wept	for	Odysseus,	her	dear	husband,	until	the	gray-eyed	goddess
Athene	drifted	a	sweet	sleep	over	her	eyelids.
With	the	evening,	the	noble	swineherd	came	back	to	Odysseus
and	his	son.	Then	they	stood	over	the	evening	meal	to	prepare	it,	and
dedicated	a	year-old	sow;	but	meanwhile	Athene
455	had	come	and	stood	close	by	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes,
and	tapped	him	with	her	wand	and	made	him	once	more	an	old	man,	and
put	foul	clothing	upon	his	skin,	for	fear	the	swineherd	might	recognize
him,	face	to	face,	and	go	with	the	message	to	circumspect	Penelope,	and
not	keep	fast	the	secret.
460	Now	Telemachos	was	the	first	who	spoke	a	word	to	him:	‘So,	noble
Eumaios,	you	have	come.	And	what	was	the	rumor	in	the	town?	Are	the
haughty	suitors	now	back	from	their	ambush,	or	are	they	still	lying	in	wait
for	me	on	my	homeward	journey?’
Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:
465	‘It	was	not	on	my	mind	to	go	down	through	the	city,	nor	to	ask,	nor	try	to
find	out;	rather	the	will	was	urgent	within	me	to	speak	my	message	with
all	speed	and	be	on	my	way	back	here.
But	one	of	your	fellows	as	a	swift	messenger	joined	my	company,	the
herald;	he	was	the	first	who	told	the	word	to	your	mother.
470	But	here	is	another	thing	I	know;	with	my	eyes	I	saw	it.
I	was	above	the	city,	where	the	Hill	of	Hermes	is,	making	my	way	along,
when	I	saw	a	fast	vessel	coming	into
our	harbor,	making	inshore,	and	many	men	were	aboard	her,	and	she	was
loaded	with	shields	and	leaf-headed	spears.	Then	I	thought	475	that	these
would	be	the	men	we	mean,	but	I	do	not	know	it.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Telemachos,	the	hallowed	prince,	smiled
as	he	caught	his	father's	eye,	but	avoided	the	eyes	of	the	swineherd.
They,	when	they	had	finished	their	work	and	got	their	feast	ready,
feasted,	nor	was	any	man's	hunger	denied	a	fair	portion.
480	But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	they
thought	of	going	to	bed,	and	accepted	the	gift	of	slumber.
BOOK	XVII
But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
Telemachos,	beloved	son	of	godlike	Odysseus,
then	bound	underneath	his	feet	the	beautiful	sandals,
and	took	up	a	powerful	spear	which	fitted	his	hand's	grip,	5	on	his	way	to
the	city,	and	going	he	spoke	to	his	swineherd:	‘Father,	I	am	going	to	the
city,	so	that	my	mother
will	see	me,	since	as	I	suppose	she	will	never	give	over	that	bitter
lamentation	of	hers	and	her	tearful	crying	until	she	sees	me	myself.	But
here	is	what	I	will	tell	you	10	to	do;	take	this	unhappy	stranger	to	the	city,
so	that	there	he	can	beg	his	dinner,	and	any	who	will	can	give	him	his	bit	of
bread	and	his	cupful;	it	is	not	for	me	to	put	up	with	everybody,	now	when	I
have	troubles	on	my	mind.	Therefore,	even	if	the	stranger	is	terribly	angry,
it	will	be	only	15	the	worse	for	him.	Speaking	the	truth	is	the	way	I	like
best.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Dear	friend,	neither	do	I	desire	that	he	should	detain	me	here;	a	beggar	is
better	begging	his	dinner	in	the	city	than	in	the	country.	Whoever	wants	to
will	give	me	something;	20	for	I	am	no	longer	the	right	age	to	stay	on	the
farms,	the	right	age	to	carry	out	any	task	the	foreman	imposes	on	me.
Go	on	then.	This	man,	the	one	you	have	asked,	will	take	me,	as	soon	as	I
have	warmed	myself	by	the	fire	and	there	is	some	sunlight;	these	clothes
are	very	poor,	and	I	hope	no	morning
Odysseus	and	Telemachos	return	separately
25	frost	undoes	me.	They	say	it	is	very	far	to	the	city.’
So	he	spoke,	but	Telemachos	strode	out	through	the	steading,
walking	fast,	and	planning	evil	things	for	the	suitors.
But	when	he	had	arrived	at	the	well-settled	house,	he	carried	his	spear	over
to	a	tall	column,	and	propped	it	against	it,	30	and	he	himself	went	inside,
stepping	over	the	stone	threshold.
Far	the	first	to	see	him	was	his	nurse,	Eurykleia,
as	she	spread	the	fleeces	on	the	elaborate	chairs.	She	burst	out	in	tears,	and
went	straight	to	him,	and	around	him	the	other	serving	maids	of	patient-
hearted	Odysseus	clustered,
35	and	made	much	of	him,	and	kissed	him	on	his	head	and	his	shoulders.
But	now	circumspect	Penelope	came	down	from	her	chamber,
looking	like	Artemis,	or	like	golden	Aphrodite,
and	burst	into	tears,	and	threw	her	arms	around	her	beloved	son,	and	kissed
him	on	his	head	and	both	of	his	shining	40	eyes,	and	tearfully	spoke
winged	words	and	addressed	him:	‘You	have	come,	Telemachos,	sweet
light,	and	I	thought	I	would	never	see	you	again,	when	you	had	gone	in	the
ship	to	Pylos
secretly,	and	against	my	will,	for	news	of	the	father
you	love.	But	come	now,	tell	me	what	sights	you	have	been	seeing.’
45	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:	‘Mother,	do	not	stir
up	a	scene	of	sorrow,	nor	trouble	my	heart	once	more,	now	I	have	escaped
from	sheer	destruction;	but	go,	wash	with	water	and	put	clean	clothing
upon	your	body,	and	going	on	to	the	upper	story	with	your	attendant
50	women,	vow	to	all	the	gods	the	service	of	complete
hecatombs,	if	Zeus	grants	requital	for	what	is	done	to	us.
But	I	will	go	to	the	place	of	meeting,	so	I	can	summon	my	guest,	who
came	along	with	me	as	I	made	my	way	here.
I	sent	him	on	ahead	of	me	with	my	godlike	companions,
55	and	told	Peiraios	to	take	him	to	his	own	house,	and	give	him	forthright
honor	and	entertainment,	until	my	arrival.’
So	he	spoke,	and	she	had	no	winged	words	for	an	answer,
and	she	washed	with	water	and	put	clean	clothing	upon	her	body,	and
vowed	to	all	the	gods	the	service	of	complete	hecatombs,	60	if	Zeus	were
to	grant	requital	for	what	had	been	done	to	them.
Telemachos	then	went	striding	out	through	the	palace,	and	left	it,
holding	his	spear,	and	a	pair	of	light-footed	dogs	went	with	him.
Athene	drifted	an	enchantment	of	grace	upon	him,
Telemachos	fetches	Theoklymenos
and	all	the	people	had	their	eyes	on	him	as	he	came	on.
65	Around	him	the	haughty	suitors	clustered.	They	all	were	speaking	him	fair,
but	in	the	deep	of	their	hearts	were	devising	evils.
Telemachos	himself	avoided	their	crowding	numbers,
and	where	Mentor	was	sitting,	and	Antiphos	and	Halitherses,	the	men	who
from	the	first	had	been	his	father's	companions,	70	there	he	went	and	sat
down,	and	they	questioned	him	about	everything.
Now	Peiraios	the	famous	spearman	came	near	them,	bringing	the	guest
through	the	city	to	the	assembly,	nor	did	Telemachos	stay	for	long	far	away
from	the	guest,	but	came	and	stood	by	him.
First	of	the	two	to	speak	was	Peiraios,	who	then	said	to	him:	75
‘Telemachos,	have	your	women	come	to	my	house	with	all	speed,	so	I	can
send	back	the	gifts	which	Menelaos	has	given	you.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Peiraios,	since	we	do	not	know	how	all	this	will	come	out,	or	whether	the
haughty	suitors	will	kill	me	here	in	my	palace	80	treacherously,	and	divide
up	all	my	father's	possessions,	I	wish	that	you	yourself,	or	one	of	these
men,	should	keep	them,	and	have	the	profit.	But	if	I	can	plot	their	death
and	destruction,	bring	them	to	my	house;	and	there	will	be	gratitude	shown
on	both	sides.’
So	he	spoke,	and	led	the	long-suffering	stranger	back	to
85	his	house.	And	when	they	had	arrived	at	the	well-settled	palace,	they	laid
down	their	mantles	along	the	chairs	and	the	benches,	and	stepped	into	the
bathtubs,	smooth-polished,	and	bathed	there.
Then,	when	the	maids	had	bathed	them	and	anointed	them	with	oil,	and	put
cloaks	of	thick	fleece	and	tunics	upon	them,	they	went	90	forth	from	the
bathing	tubs,	and	took	their	places	on	settles.
A	maidservant	brought	water	for	them	and	poured	it	from	a	splendid	and
golden	pitcher,	holding	it	above	a	silver	basin
for	them	to	wash,	and	she	pulled	a	polished	table	before	them.
A	grave	housekeeper	brought	in	the	bread	and	served	it	to	them,	95	adding
many	good	things	to	it,	generous	with	her	provisions.
His	mother	sat	opposite	beside	the	pillar	supporting
the	hall,	sitting	back	on	a	chair	and	turning	fine	yarn	on	a	distaff.
They	put	forth	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
But	when	they	had	put	away	their	desire	for	eating	and	drinking,	100	it	was
circumspect	Penelope	who	began	their	discourse:	‘Telemachos,	I	will	go
back	now	to	my	upper	chamber,
and	lie	down	on	my	bed,	which	is	made	sorrowful,	always
Penelope	told	of	the	travels
disordered	with	the	tears	I	have	wept,	ever	since	Odysseus	went	with	the
sons	of	Atreus	to	Troy;	and	you	had	no	patience	105	to	tell	me—before	the
haughty	suitors	arrive	at	our	palace—	any	news	you	may	have	heard	of
your	father's	homecoming.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘Then,	my	mother,	I	will	tell	you	the	whole	true	story.
We	went	to	Pylos,	and	to	Nestor,	shepherd	of	the	people,	110	and	he,	in	his
high	house,	gave	me	hospitality,	and	loving	free	attention,	as	a	father
would	to	his	own	beloved
son,	who	was	newly	arrived	from	a	long	voyage	elsewhere.	So	he	freely
took	care	of	me,	with	his	own	glorious	children.
But	he	said	he	had	heard	nothing	about	enduring	Odysseus,	115	nor
whether	he	was	alive	or	dead,	from	any	of	the	peoples	of	earth.	He	sent	me
to	Atreus'	son,	spear-famed	Menelaos,	giving	me	passage	with	his	own
horses	and	compact	chariot.
There	I	saw	Helen	of	Argos,	for	whose	sake	Argives	and	Trojans	had
undergone	much	hardship	by	the	gods'	will.	Menelaos	120	of	the	great	war
cry	questioned	me,	when	I	came	to	him,	and	asked	what	need	had	brought
me	to	glorious	Lakedaimon;	whereupon	I	told	him	the	whole	truth	of	my
story,
and	he	in	turn	spoke	to	me	then	and	gave	me	an	answer:	“Oh,	for	shame,	it
was	in	the	bed	of	a	bold	and	strong	man	125	they	wished	to	lie,	they
themselves	being	all	unwarlike.
As	when	a	doe	has	brought	her	fawns	to	the	lair	of	a	lion,	and	put	them
there	to	sleep,	they	are	newborn	and	still	suckling,	then	wanders	out	into
the	foothills	and	the	grassy	corners,	grazing	there,	but	now	the	lion	comes
back	to	his	own	lair	130	and	visits	a	shameful	destruction	on	both	mother
and	children;	so	now	Odysseus	will	visit	shameful	destruction	on	these
men.
O	father	Zeus	and	Athene	and	Apollo,	I	wish	that
as	he	was	when,	upon	a	time,	in	strong-founded	Lesbos
he	stood	up	and	wrestled	Philomeleides	from	a	challenge,	135	and	threw
him	strongly,	so	delighting	all	the	Achaians;	I	wish	that	such	an	Odysseus
would	come	now	among	the	suitors.
They	all	would	find	death	was	quick	and	marriage	a	painful	matter.
But	for	what	you	entreat	me	for	and	ask	me	about,	I	will	not	turn	away
from	the	tale	and	speak	idly,	nor	will	I	deceive	you,	140	but	of	what	the
ever-truthful	Old	Man	of	the	Sea	told	me,	I	will	tell	you	all	without
concealment,	and	hold	back	nothing.
of	Telemachos
He	said	he	had	seen	him	on	an	island,	suffering	strong	pains	in	the	palace
of	the	nymph	Kalypso,	and	she	detains	him,	by	constraint,	and	he	cannot
make	his	way	to	his	country;	145	for	he	has	not	any	ships	by	him,	nor	any
companions
who	can	convey	him	back	across	the	sea's	wide	ridges.”
So	spoke	Atreus'	son,	spear-famed	Menelaos.	After
I	had	done	all	this	I	came	back.	The	immortals	gave	me	a	following	wind,
and	brought	me	quickly	to	the	dear	land	of	my	fathers.’
150	So	he	spoke,	and	stirred	the	spirit	within	her.	And	now	Theoklymenos,	a
godlike	man,	spoke	to	both	of	them:	‘O	respected	wife	of	Odysseus,	son
of	Laertes,
attend	my	word,	because	he	does	not	understand	clearly,	but	I	shall
prophesy	truly	to	you,	and	hold	back	nothing.
155	Zeus	be	my	witness,	first	of	the	gods,	and	the	table	of	friendship,	and	the
hearth	of	blameless	Odysseus,	to	which	I	come	as	a	suppliant,	that
Odysseus	is	already	here	in	the	land	of	his	fathers,	sitting	still	or
advancing,	learning	of	all	these	evil	actions,	and	devising	evils	for	all	of
the	suitors.
160	Such	was	the	bird	sign	I	interpreted,	and	I	told	it
to	Telemachos,	as	I	sat	aboard	the	strong-benched	vessel.’
Then	in	turn	circumspect	Penelope	answered	him:
‘If	only	this	word,	stranger	and	guest,	were	brought	to	fulfillment,	soon
you	would	be	aware	of	my	love	and	many	gifts	given	165	by	me,	so	any
man	who	met	you	would	call	you	blessed.’
So	now	these	three	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,
but	meanwhile	before	the	palace	of	Odysseus	the	suitors	amused
themselves	with	discs	and	with	light	spears	for	throwing,	on	a	leveled
floor,	unruly	men,	as	they	always	had	been.
170	But	when	it	was	time	for	dinner,	and	the	sheep	from	the	fields	had	been
coming	in	from	all	sides,	and	the	same	men	as	usual	drove	them,	then
Medon	spoke	to	the	suitors.	It	was	he	among	all	the	heralds	whom	they
liked	best,	and	he	used	to	wait	on	them	at	their	feasting:	‘Young	men,
since	you	have	all	taken	your	pleasure	in	exercise,	175	go	on	into	the
house	so	we	can	make	dinner	ready.
Nothing	is	any	the	worse	when	meals	are	taken	in	season.’
He	spoke,	and	they	stood	up	and	went,	and	did	as	he	told	them;	and
they,	when	they	had	gone	into	the	well-settled	palace,	laid	their	mantles
down	along	the	chairs	and	the	benches,
Eumaios	and	Odysseus	meet	Melanthios
180	and	set	about	sacrificing	great-sized	sheep,	and	fat	goats,	and	sacrificing
an	ox	of	the	herd,	and	fattened	porkers,	as	they	prepared	their	feast.	But
Odysseus	now	and	the	noble	swineherd	were	stirring	themselves	to	go	to
town	from	the	country.
First	of	the	two	to	speak	was	the	swineherd,	leader	of	people:	185
‘Stranger,	since	then	you	are	eager	to	go	to	the	city	today,	as	my	master
told	you	to	do,	though	I	could	have	wanted	you	rather	to	stay	here	and
guard	the	steading—even	so	I	go	in	awe	of	him	and	fear	him,	and	any
reproaches
he	might	give	me;	a	scolding	comes	hard	from	a	master—so	then,	190	let
us	be	on	our	way,	for	most	of	the	day	is	already
gone.	The	evening	is	coming	on.	You	may	find	it	colder.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:	‘I	see,	I
understand.	You	speak	to	one	who	follows	you.
But	let	us	be	on	our	way.	You	be	my	guide	on	the	journey.
195	Only	give	me	some	kind	of	cudgel,	if	you	have	any
cut,	to	lean	on.	They	say	the	road	is	very	slippery.’
He	spoke,	and	over	his	shoulder	slung	the	ugly	wallet
that	was	full	of	holes,	with	a	twist	of	rope	attached	to	dangle	it.
Eumaios	gave	him	a	walking	stick	that	suited	his	fancy,	200	and	the	two	of
them	went	on,	with	the	dogs	and	the	herdsman	staying	behind	to	guard	the
farm.	He	led	his	lord	to	the	city,	looking	as	he	did	like	a	dismal	vagabond
and	an	old	man,	propping	on	a	stick,	and	wore	wretched	clothing	upon	his
body.
Now	as	they	went	down	over	the	stony	road,	and	were	coming
205	close	to	the	city,	and	had	arrived	at	the	fountain,	sweet-running	and	made
of	stone;	and	there	the	townspeople	went	for	their	water;	
Ithakos
	had
made	this,	and	
Neritos
,	and	
Polyktor
;	and	around	it	was	a	grove	of	black
poplars,	trees	that	grow	by	water,	all	in	a	circle,	and	there	was	cold	water
pouring	210	down	from	the	rock	above;	over	it	had	been	built	an	altar	of
the	nymphs,	and	there	all	the	wayfarers	made	their	sacrifice;	there
Melanthios
,	son	of	Dolios,	came	upon	them	as	he	drove	his	goats,	the	ones
that	were	finest	among	his	goatflocks,	for	the	suitors'	dinner,	and	two
other	herdsmen	went	along	with	him.
215	Seeing	the	two	he	spoke	and	named	them,	giving	them	curses	overbearing
and	shameful,	and	stirred	the	heart	of	Odysseus:	‘See	now	how	the	rascal
comes	on	leading	a	rascal
about;	like	guides	what	is	like	itself,	just	as	a	god	does.
on	their	way	to	town
Where,	you	detestable	swineherd,	are	you	taking	this	wretched	220	man,
this	bothersome	beggar	who	spoils	the	fun	of	the	feasting,	the	kind	who
stands	and	rubs	his	shoulders	on	many	doorposts,	begging	only	for
handouts,	never	for	swords	or	caldrons.
If	you	would	turn	him	over	to	me	to	keep	my	steading,
then	he	could	drink	whey	and	build	up	a	big	leg	muscle,	225	sweeping	my
pens,	and	carrying	green	stuff	in	to	the	young	goats.
But	since	he	has	learned	nothing	but	mischief,	he	will	not	be	willing	to	go
to	work,	but	would	rather	go	begging	all	through	the	district,	asking	for
handouts	and	feeding	up	his	bottomless	belly.
But	I	tell	you	this	straight	out	and	it	will	be	a	thing	accomplished.
230	If	he	ever	comes	near	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus,
his	ribs	and	head	will	feel	the	weight	of	plenty	of	footstools	flung	at	him
all	over	the	house	by	the	hands	of	heroes.’
So	he	spoke,	and	as	he	went	by	recklessly	lashed	out
with	his	heel	to	the	hip,	but	failed	to	knock	him	out	of	the	pathway,	235	for
Odysseus	stood	it,	unshaken,	while	he	pondered	within	him	whether	to	go
for	him	with	his	cudgel,	and	take	the	life	from	him,	or	pick	him	up	like	a
jug	and	break	his	head	on	the	ground.	Yet	still	he	stood	it,	and	kept	it	all
inside	him.	The	swineherd	stared,	and	cursed	him,	and	prayed	aloud	with
his	hands	uplifted:	240	‘Nymphs	of	the	fountain,	daughters	of	Zeus,	if	ever
Odysseus	burned	for	you	the	thigh	pieces	of	lambs	or	goats,	wrapping
them	in	the	rich	fat,	then	grant	me	this	favor	I	ask	for,	namely	that	the	man
himself	will	come	home,	with	the	divinity	guiding	him;	so,	Melanthios,	he
would	send	flying	all	those	glories	245	you	wear	now	in	your	insolence,
forever	loitering
here	in	the	town,	while	useless	herdsmen	ruin	the	sheepflocks.’
Then	in	turn	Melanthios	the	goatherd	answered	him:
‘Shame	on	the	speaking	of	this	nasty-minded	dog.	Some	day	I	will	get	him
aboard	a	strong-benched	ship,	and	take	him	250	far	from	Ithaka,	where	he
could	win	me	a	good	livelihood.
If	only	Apollo,	silver-bowed,	would	strike	down	Telemachos	today	in	his
halls,	or	he	were	killed	by	the	suitors,	as	surely	as	Odysseus,	far	away,	has
lost	his	day	of	homecoming.’
So	he	spoke,	and	left	them	there,	as	they	went	on	easily;
255	but	he	went	forward,	and	quickly	came	to	the	house	of	his	master.
He	went	straight	on	inside,	and	sat	down	next	to	the	suitors,	opposite
Eurymachos,	whom	he	was	fondest	of.	The	servants
The	old	dog	Argos	recognizes	Odysseus
doing	the	dinner	placed	a	portion	of	meat	before	him.
A	grave	housekeeper	brought	the	bread	and	set	it	down	for	him	260	to	eat.
Odysseus,	on	his	way	with	the	noble	swineherd,	stood	close	in	front	of	the
house,	and	around	them	came	the	clamor	of	the	hollow	lyre,	for	Phemios
had	struck	up	the	music	to	sing.	Odysseus	took	the	swineherd's	hand,	and
said	to	him:	‘Eumaios,	surely	this	is	the	handsome	house	of	Odysseus.
265	Easily	it	is	singled	out	and	seen	among	many,
for	one	part	is	joined	on	to	another,	and	the	courtyard	is	worked	on	with
wall	and	copings,	and	the	doors	have	been	well	made,	with	double	panels.
Nobody	could	belittle	this	house.	And	also
I	realize	that	many	men	are	holding	a	feast	there,
270	for	the	smell	of	the	food	comes	to	me,	and	there	is	the	clamor	of	the	lyre,
which	the	gods	made	to	be	companion	of	feasting.’
Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Easily	you	perceived	it,	nor	are	you	otherwise	without	sense;	but	come,	let
us	think	out	how	we	will	act	in	these	matters.
275	Either	you	go	on	first	into	the	well-settled	palace,
and	go	among	the	suitors,	and	leave	me	here	on	the	outside;	or	if	you	will,
stay	here,	while	I	go	on	ahead	of	you.
But	do	not	be	slow,	or	someone	here	outside,	seeing	you,	might	strike	you,
or	throw	something.	Here,	I	bid	you	be	careful.’
280	Then	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘I	see,	I
understand;	you	speak	to	one	who	follows	you.
But	you	go	on	ahead,	and	I	will	stay	here	on	the	outside.
I	am	not	unfamiliar	with	blows,	and	things	thrown	at	me.
The	spirit	in	me	is	enduring,	since	I	have	suffered	much	hardship	285	on
the	waves	and	in	the	fighting;	so	let	this	adventure	follow.
Even	so,	there	is	no	suppressing	the	ravenous	belly,
a	cursed	thing,	which	bestows	many	evils	on	men,	seeing	that	even	for	its
sake	the	strong-built	ships	are	handled	across	the	barren	great	sea,	bringing
misfortune	to	enemies.’
290	Now	as	these	two	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,	a	dog	who	was
lying	there	raised	his	head	and	ears.	This	was	
Argos
,	patient-hearted
Odysseus'	dog,	whom	he	himself	raised,	but	got	no	joy	of	him,	since
before	that	he	went	to	sacred	Ilion.	In	the	days	before,	the	young	men	had
taken	him	295	out	to	follow	goats	of	the	wild,	and	deer,	and	rabbits;	but
now	he	had	been	put	aside,	with	his	master	absent,
but	dies	before	revealing	his	identity
and	lay	on	the	deep	pile	of	dung,	from	the	mules	and	oxen,	which	lay
abundant	before	the	gates,	so	that	the	servants	of	Odysseus	could	take	it	to
his	great	estate,	for	manuring.
300	There	the	dog	Argos	lay	in	the	dung,	all	covered	with	dog	ticks.
Now,	as	he	perceived	that	Odysseus	had	come	close	to	him,	he	wagged	his
tail,	and	laid	both	his	ears	back;	only
he	now	no	longer	had	the	strength	to	move	any	closer
to	his	master,	who,	watching	him	from	a	distance,	without	Eumaios	305
noticing,	secretly	wiped	a	tear	away,	and	said	to	him:	‘Eumaios,	this	is
amazing,	this	dog	that	lies	on	the	dunghill.
The	shape	of	him	is	splendid,	and	yet	I	cannot	be	certain	whether	he	had
the	running	speed	to	go	with	this	beauty,	or	is	just	one	of	the	kind	of	table
dog	that	gentlemen	310	keep,	and	it	is	only	for	show	that	their	masters	care
for	them.’
Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘This,	it	is	too	true,	is	the	dog	of	a	man	who	perished	far	away.	If	he	were
such,	in	build	and	performance,
as	when	Odysseus	left	him	behind,	when	he	went	to	Ilion,	315	soon	you
could	see	his	speed	and	his	strength	for	yourself.	Never	could	any	wild
animal,	in	the	profound	depths	of	the	forest,	escape,	once	he	pursued.	He
was	very	clever	at	tracking.
But	now	he	is	in	bad	times.	His	master,	far	from	his	country,	has	perished,
and	the	women	are	careless,	and	do	not	look	after	him;	320	and	serving
men,	when	their	masters	are	no	longer	about,	to	make	them	work,	are	no
longer	willing	to	do	their	rightful	duties.
For	Zeus	of	the	wide	brows	takes	away	one	half	of	the	virtue	from	a	man,
once	the	day	of	slavery	closes	upon	him.’
So	he	spoke,	and	went	into	the	strongly-settled	palace,
325	and	strode	straight	on,	to	the	great	hall	and	the	haughty	suitors,	But	the
doom	of	dark	death	now	closed	over	the	dog,	Argos,	when,	after	nineteen
years	had	gone	by,	he	had	seen	Odysseus.
Godlike	Telemachos	was	the	first	by	far	to	notice
the	swineherd	as	he	came	into	the	house,	and	quickly	he	nodded	330	to
summon	him	over.	The	swineherd,	looking	about	him,	picked	up	a	chair
that	was	lying	near	where	the	carver	sat,	cutting	much	meat	for	the	suitors,
as	these	feasted	all	through	the	palace.
This	he	took	and	placed	it	by	Telemachos'	table
facing	him,	then	sat	down	there	himself,	and	the	herald	335	took	a	portion,
and	served	him,	and	passed	him	bread	from	the	basket.
Odysseus	in	his	own	house
Close	after	him	Odysseus	now	came	into	the	palace,
looking	as	he	did	like	a	dismal	vagabond	and	an	old	man,	propping	on	a
stick,	and	wore	foul	clothing	upon	his	body.
He	sat	down	then	on	the	ashwood	threshold,	inside	the	doorway,	340
leaning	against	the	doorpost	of	cypress	wood,	which	the	carpenter	once
had	expertly	planed,	and	drawn	it	true	to	a	chalkline;	but	Telemachos	spoke
a	word	to	the	swineherd,	calling	him	over,	taking	and	giving	him	a	whole
loaf	from	the	beautiful	basket,	with	meat,	as	much	food	as	both	arms	could
hold	in	their	compass:	345	‘Take	all	this	and	give	it	to	the	stranger,	but	also
tell	him	to	go	about	among	the	suitors,	and	beg	from	all	of	them.
Modesty,	for	a	man	in	need,	is	not	a	good	quality.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	swineherd	went,	when	he	heard	his	order.
He	came	and	stood	close	by	Odysseus,	and	spoke	in	winged	words:	350
‘Stranger,	Telemachos	gives	you	this,	and	also	he	tells	you	to	go	about
among	the	suitors,	and	beg	from	all	of	them.
He	said	that	modesty,	for	a	poor	man,	is	no	good	quality.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Lord	Zeus,	let	Telemachos	be	one	of	the	prosperous
355	men;	let	everything	befall	him	that	his	heart	longs	for.’
He	spoke,	and	with	both	hands	accepting	everything,	laid	it
there	in	front	of	his	feet,	on	top	of	the	ugly	wallet,	and	ate	it,	all	the	while
the	singer	sang	in	the	halls.	Then,	when	he	had	eaten	his	dinner,	and	the
divine	singer	was	finished,	360	the	suitors	raised	their	tumult	along	the
halls;	but	Athene	came	then	and	stood	close	by	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes,
and	stirred	him	to	go	collect	his	bits	of	bread	from	the	suitors,	and	so	learn
which	of	them	were	fair,	which	unfair;	but	even	so,	she	would	not	deliver
any	of	them	from	disaster.
365	He	went	on	his	way,	from	left	to	right,	so	to	beg	from	each	man,	reaching
his	hand	out	always,	as	if	for	a	long	time	he	had	been	a	beggar,	and	they
took	pity	and	gave,	and	they	wondered	at	him;	they	asked	each	other	what
man	he	was,	and	where	he	came	from.
But	now	Melanthios,	the	goatherding	man,	said	to	them:	370	‘Hear	me
now,	you	suitors	of	our	glorious	queen,	concerning	this	stranger;	for	I	have
seen	him	before;	know	then
that	it	was	the	swineherd	who	guided	him	here,	but	I	do	not	know	clearly
who	the	man	is	himself,	or	what	race	he	claims	to	come	of.’
begs	from	the	suitors
So	he	spoke.	Antinoös	spoke	then	and	scolded	the	swineherd:
375	‘O	most	distinguished	swineherd,	why	did	you	bring	this	fellow	to	the
city?	Do	we	not	already	have	enough	other
vagabonds,	and	bothersome	beggars	to	ruin	our	feasting?
Or,	now	that	men	gather	here	to	eat	up	your	master's	substance,	is	that	not
enough,	but	you	had	to	invite	this	one	in	also?’
380	Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘Antinoös,
though	you	are	noble,	this	was	not	well	spoken.
For	who	goes	visiting	elsewhere	so	as	to	call	in	another	stranger,	unless	he
is	one	who	works	for	the	people,	either	a	prophet,	or	a	healer	of	sickness,
or	a	skilled	workman,	385	or	inspired	singer,	one	who	can	give	delight	by
his	singing?
These	are	the	men	who	all	over	the	endless	earth	are	invited.
But	nobody	would	ask	in	a	beggar,	one	who	would	feed	on	himself.	You,
though,	beyond	all	the	other	suitors,	are	heavy	on	the	servants	of	Odysseus,
and	me	most	of	all,	but	I	390	for	my	part	do	not	care,	while	still
circumspect	Penelope	lives	in	the	palace,	together	with	godlike
Telemachos.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Silence.	Do	not	answer	him	at	such	length.	Antinoös
has	made	it	his	habit	always	to	irritate	others	with	hurtful	395	words,	and
stir	them	up,	and	encourages	others	to	do	so.’
So	he	spoke,	and	then	addressed	his	words	to	Antinoös:
‘Antinoös,	as	a	father	for	his	son	you	take	good	care
of	me,	when	you	tell	our	stranger	guest	to	get	out	of	the	palace,	with	a
strict	word.	May	this	not	be	the	end	god	makes	of	it.
400	Take	and	give.	I	do	not	begrudge	you.	I	even	urge	you.
And	do	not	have	any	respect	for	my	mother,	nor	yet	for	any	thrall	beside,
who	lives	in	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus.
But	such	is	not	the	kind	of	intention	you	keep	within	you.
You	are	more	eager	to	eat,	yourself,	than	to	give	to	another.’
405	Then	in	turn	Antinoös	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘High-spoken	intemperate
Telemachos,	what	accusations	you	have	made.	If	all	the	suitors	would
hand	him	this	kind	of	present,	the	house	would	then	do	without	him	for
the	space	of	three	months.’
So	he	spoke,	and	picked	up	a	footstool	that	lay	by	the	table
410	and	showed	it.	He	had	his	shining	feet	on	it	as	he	feasted.
But	all	the	others	gave	to	him,	and	they	filled	his	wallet	with	bread	and
meat,	and	Odysseus	was	on	the	point	of	finishing
Odysseus	struck	by	Antinoös
his	test	of	the	Achaians,	and	getting	back	free	to	his	doorsill;	but	now	he
stood	by	Antinoös,	and	spoke	a	word	to	him:	415	‘Give,	dear	friend.	You
seem	to	me,	of	all	the	Achaians,	not	the	worst,	but	the	best.	You	look	like	a
king.	Therefore,	you	ought	to	give	me	a	better	present	of	food	than	the
others	have	done,	and	I	will	sing	your	fame	all	over	the	endless	earth,	for	I
too	once	lived	in	my	own	house	among	people,	420	prospering	in	wealth,
and	often	I	gave	to	a	wanderer
according	to	what	he	was	and	wanted	when	he	came	to	me;	and	I	had
serving	men	by	thousands,	and	many	another
good	thing,	by	which	men	live	well	and	are	called	prosperous.	Only	Zeus,
son	of	Kronos,	spoiled	it	all—somehow	he	wished	to—	425	when	he	put	it
into	my	head	to	go	with	the	roving	pirates	to	Egypt,	a	long	voyage,	so	that
I	must	be	ruined.
I	stayed	my	oarswept	ships	inside	the	Aigyptos	River.
Then	I	urged	my	eager	companions	to	stay	where	they	were,	there	close	to
the	fleet,	and	to	guard	the	ships,	and	was	urgent	with	them	430	to	send
lookouts	to	the	watching	places,	but	they	following	their	own	impulse,	and
giving	way	to	marauding	violence,	suddenly	began	plundering	the
Egyptians'	beautiful
fields,	and	carried	off	the	women	and	innocent	children,	and	killed	the
men,	and	soon	the	outcry	came	to	the	city.
435	They	heard	the	shouting,	and	at	the	time	when	dawn	shows,	they	came	on
us,	and	all	the	plain	was	filled	with	horses	and	infantry	and	the	glare	of
bronze;	and	Zeus	who	delights	in	the	thunder	flung	down	a	foul	panic
among	my	companions,	and	none	was	so	hardy	as	to	stand	and	fight,	for
the	evils	stood	in	a	circle	around	them.
440	There	they	killed	many	of	us	with	the	sharp	bronze,	and	others	they	led
away	alive,	to	work	for	them	in	forced	labor;	but	they	gave	me	away,	into
Cyprus,	to	a	stranger	arriving,	
Dmetor
,	Iasos'	son,	who	was	the	strong
king	in	Cyprus.
From	there	I	came	here,	where	I	am	now,	suffering	hardships.’
445	Then	Antinoös	answered	him	in	turn,	and	said	to	him:	‘What	spirit
brought	this	pain	upon	us,	to	spoil	our	feasting?
Stand	off,	so,	in	the	middle,	and	keep	away	from	my	table,	or	otherwise
you	may	find	yourself	in	a	sorry	Cyprus
or	Egypt,	you	are	so	bold	a	one,	and	a	shameless	beggar.
450	You	went	the	whole	circle	and	stood	by	all,	and	they	all	gave	to	you
who	is	scolded	by	the	others
recklessly,	for	there	is	no	holding	back	nor	sparing
of	favors	from	another	man's	goods,	since	each	has	plenty.’
Now	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke,	as	he	drew	back	from	him:
‘Shame;	the	wits	in	you,	it	is	clear,	do	not	match	your	outward	455	beauty.
You	would	not	give	a	bit	of	salt	to	a	servant	in	your	own	house,	since	now,
sitting	at	another's,	you	could	not	take	a	bit	of	bread	and	give	it	to	me.	It	is
there	in	abundance.’
He	spoke,	and	Antinoös	in	his	heart	grew	still	more	angry.
Looking	at	him	from	under	his	brows,	he	addressed	him	in	winged	words:
460	‘Now	I	think	that	you	can	no	longer	make	a	respectable	retreat	out	of
the	palace,	since	what	you	say	is	scurrilous.’
He	spoke,	and	threw	the	footstool	and	hit	him	in	the	right	shoulder	near
the	base,	in	the	back,	but	he	stood	up	to	it,	steady	as	a	rock,	nor	did	the
missile	thrown	by	Antinoös	shake	him,	465	but	he	shook	his	head	in
silence,	deeply	devising	evils.
He	went	back	to	the	sill	and	sat	there,	and	spread	out	before	him	the	wallet
that	was	well	filled,	and	spoke	a	word	to	the	suitors:	‘You	who	are	suitors
of	this	most	glorious	queen,	hear	me	while	I	speak	out	what	the	heart
within	my	breast	urges:	470	there	is	no	grief	that	comes	to	the	heart,	nor
yet	any	sorrow,	when	a	man	is	hit,	fighting	in	battle	for	the	sake	of	his	own
possessions,	either	to	guard	his	shining	sheep	or	his	cattle;	but	Antinoös
struck	me	all	because	of	my	wretched	belly,	that	cursed	thing,	who	bestows
many	evils	on	men.	Therefore,	475	if	there	are	any	gods	or	any	furies	for
beggars,
Antinoös	may	find	his	death	before	he	is	married.’
Then	Antinoös,	son	of	Eupeithes,	gave	him	an	answer:
‘Go	in	peace,	stranger,	and	sit	down,	or	go	away	elsewhere,	or	else,	for	the
way	you	talk,	the	young	men	might	take	you	and	drag	you	480	by	hand	or
foot	through	the	house,	and	tear	the	skin	on	your	body.’
So	he	spoke,	but	all	the	rest	were	wildly	indignant,
and	this	is	the	way	one	of	these	haughty	young	men	would	speak	to	him:
‘Antinoös,	you	did	badly	to	hit	the	unhappy	vagabond:
a	curse	on	you,	if	he	turns	out	to	be	some	god	from	heaven.
485	For	the	gods	do	take	on	all	sorts	of	transformations,	appearing	as
strangers	from	elsewhere,	and	thus	they	range	at	large	through	the	cities,
watching	to	see	which	men	keep	the	laws,	and	which	are	violent.’
Eumaios	tells	Penelope
So	spoke	the	suitors,	but	he	paid	no	attention	to	what	they	were	saying.
But	Telemachos	sustained	in	his	heart	a	great	sorrow	over	490	the	blow,
but	he	did	not	let	fall	from	his	eyes	any	groundward	tear,	but	shook	his
head	in	silence,	deeply	devising
evils.	But	when	circumspect	Penelope	heard	that	the	stranger	had	been
struck	in	her	halls,	she	spoke	to	her	serving	women:	‘Thus,	I	pray,	may	the
archer	Apollo	strike	at	the	striker.’
495	Then	the	housekeeper,	
Eurynome
,	spoke	and	answered:	‘If	only	some
fulfillment	befell	our	prayers.	Then	not	one	of	these	men	would	be	alive	to
meet	the	Dawn	in	her	splendor.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘Mother,	they	are	all	hateful,	since	all	are	devising	evils,	500	but	Antinoös,
beyond	the	rest,	is	like	black	death.	Here	is	a	stranger,	some	unfortunate
man,	who	goes	through	our	palace	asking	alms	of	the	men,	for	his
helplessness	forces	him	to	it.
Then	all	the	others	gave	and	filled	his	bag,	but	this	man	struck	him	with	a
footstool	at	the	base	of	the	right	shoulder.’
505	So	Penelope,	sitting	up	in	her	chamber,	conversed	with	her	serving
women,	while	great	Odysseus	was	eating	his	dinner.
But	now	she	summoned	the	noble	swineherd	to	her,	saying:	‘Go	on	your
way	now,	noble	Eumaios,	and	tell	the	stranger	to	come,	so	I	can	befriend
him,	and	so	I	can	ask	him
510	if	he	has	somewhere	heard	any	news	of	steadfast	Odysseus	or	seen	him	in
person.	He	seems	like	a	man	who	has	wandered	widely.’
Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘If	only	these	Achaians,	my	queen,	would	let	you	have	silence!
Such	stories	he	tells,	he	would	charm	out	the	dear	heart	within	you.
515	Three	nights	I	had	him	with	me,	and	for	three	days	I	detained	him	in	my
shelter,	for	he	came	first	to	me.	He	had	fled	from	a	vessel;	but	he	has	not
yet	told	the	story	of	all	his	suffering.
But	as	when	a	man	looks	to	a	singer,	who	has	been	given	from	the	gods	the
skill	with	which	he	sings	for	delight	of	mortals,	520	and	they	are
impassioned	and	strain	to	hear	it	when	he	sings	to	them,	so	he	enchanted
me	in	the	halls	as	he	sat	beside	me.
He	says	that	he	is	a	friend	by	family	of	Odysseus,
with	his	home	in	Crete,	where	lives	the	generation	of	Minos,	and	from
there	he	made	his	way	to	this	place,	suffering	hardships,	525	driven
helpless	along.	He	claims	he	has	heard	that	Odysseus
about	his	unknown	guest
is	near,	in	the	rich	country	of	the	men	of	Thesprotia,	and	alive,	and
bringing	many	treasures	back	to	his	household.’
Then	in	turn	circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him:
‘Go	now,	call	him	here,	so	he	can	tell	me	directly,
530	and	let	these	people	sit	by	the	doors	and	play	their	games,	or	else	go	and
do	it	at	home,	whenever	the	spirit	favors.
For	their	own	properties	are	stored,	unspoiled,	in	their	houses,	bread,	and
sweet	wine,	but	this	their	own	house-people	eat.	Meanwhile,	they,	day	by
day	visiting	our	house,	and	always
535	dedicating	our	oxen,	and	our	sheep	and	fat	goats,
hold	their	festival	and	recklessly	drink	up	our	shining	wine;	and	most	of	it
is	used	up,	for	there	is	no	man	here	such	as	Odysseus	was,	to	keep	the
plague	from	his	household.
But	if	Odysseus	could	come,	and	return	to	the	land	of	his	fathers,	540	soon,
with	his	son,	he	could	punish	the	violence	of	these	people.’
She	spoke,	and	Telemachos	sneezed	amain,	and	around	him	the	palace
re-echoed	terribly	to	the	sound.	Penelope,	laughing,
spoke	presently	to	Eumaios	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	‘Go,
please,	and	summon	the	stranger	into	my	presence.	Do	you	545	not	see
how	my	son	sneezed	for	everything	I	have	spoken?
May	it	mean	that	death,	accomplished	in	full,	befall	the	suitors	each	and
all,	not	one	avoiding	death	and	destruction.
And	put	away	in	your	heart	this	other	thing	that	I	tell	you.
If	I	learn	that	everything	he	says	is	truthfully	spoken,	550	I	will	give	him
beautiful	clothing	to	wear,	a	tunic	and	mantle.’
So	she	spoke,	and	the	swineherd	went,	when	he	heard	what	she	told
him,	and	he	came	and	stood	close	by	Odysseus	and	spoke	in	winged
words:	‘Father	and	friend,	circumspect	Penelope,	mother
of	Telemachos,	summons	you,	for	her	heart	is	urgent	to	find	out	555	from
you	about	her	husband,	though	she	is	suffering	troubles.
And	if	she	learns	that	all	you	say	is	truthfully	spoken,	she	will	give	you	a
tunic	and	mantle	to	wear,	what	you	have	need	of	most	of	all;	and	you,	by
begging	your	bread	through	the	city,	can	keep	your	belly	sustained;	and	he
who	will	can	give	to	you.’
560	Then	in	turn	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	answered	him:	‘Eumaios,	by
and	by	I	will	tell	everything	truly	to	the	daughter	of	Ikarios,	circumspect
Penelope.
For	I	know	well	about	him,	we	have	suffered	the	same	sad	story.
Eumaios	goes	back
Only	now	I	am	afraid	of	this	swarm	of	rough	suitors,
565	whose	outrageous	violence	goes	up	into	the	iron
sky.	For	even	now,	as	I	went	through	the	house,	doing
no	harm,	and	this	man	struck	me	and	gave	me	over	to	suffering,
Telemachos	could	not	save	me	from	this,	nor	could	any	other.
Tell	Penelope,	therefore,	for	all	her	eagerness,	to	wait	570	for	me	in	the
palace	until	the	sun	has	set.	Let	her
then	question	me	about	her	husband's	day	of	homecoming,	giving	me	a
seat	close	to	the	fire,	since	these	are	wretched	clothes	I	have.	You	know
this	yourself;	you	are	my	first	patron.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	swineherd	went,	when	he	heard	what	he	told	him.
575	But	Penelope	said	to	him	as	he	stepped	over	the	threshold:	‘You	do	not
bring	him,	Eumaios?	What	is	this	vagabond	thinking?
Does	he	fear	some	indignity,	or	is	he	otherwise	bashful	about	the	house?	A
bashful	vagabond	makes	a	bad	beggar.’
Then,	O	swineherd	Eumaios,	you	said	to	her	in	answer:
580	‘He	speaks	within	reason,	as	another	man	might	think	also,	in	keeping
away	from	the	violence	of	these	insolent	men.	Therefore	he	tells	you	to
wait	until	after	the	sun	has	gone	down.	For	you	yourself	also,	my	queen,
this	way	it	will	be	much	better:	to	talk	in	private	to	the	stranger,	and	hear
his	story.’
585	Then	in	turn	circumspect	Penelope	answered	him:	‘So	it	shall	be.	The
stranger's	thought	is	not	without	good	sense,	since	never	yet	among	mortal
mankind	have	there	been	any	men	who	have	been	so	violent	in	their	wild
endeavors.’
So	she	instructed	him,	and	the	noble	swineherd	went	back
590	into	the	crowd	of	the	suitors,	when	he	had	understood	all	of	it.
At	once	he	spoke	his	winged	words	to	Telemachos,	leaning	his	head	close
to	him,	so	that	none	of	the	others	might	hear	him:	‘Dear	child,	I	am	going
back	to	guard	the	pigs	and	that	other	livelihood	that	is	yours	and	mine.	Let
all	be	in	your	charge	595	here.	First	of	all	take	care	of	yourself,	and	be	very
watchful	against	harm	to	you.	There	are	many	Achaians	who	wish	you
evil.
May	Zeus	destroy	them	before	they	can	make	any	harm	befall	us.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘So	it	shall	be,	my	father.	Go,	when	you	have	had	your	supper;	600	but
come	again	in	the	morning,	and	bring	us	beautiful	victims.
I	myself	will	see	to	things	here,	as	will	the	immortals.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	other	sat	down	again	on	a	polished
leaving	Odysseus	in	the	palace
chair.	But	when	he	had	his	fill	of	eating	and	drinking,	he	went	on	back	to
the	pigs,	and	left	the	courts	and	the	palace	605	full	of	banqueters,	who	took
their	pleasure	in	singing	and	dancing.	By	now	the	later	part	of	the	day	had
come	on.
BOOK	XVIII
And	now	there	arrived	a	public	beggar,	who	used	to	go	begging	through
the	town	of	Ithaka,	known	to	fame	for	his	ravenous	belly	and	appetite	for
eating	and	drinking.	There	was	no	real	strength	in	him,	nor	any	force,	but
his	build	was	big	to	look	at.
5	He	had	the	name	
Arnaios
,	for	thus	the	lady	his	mother	called	him	from	birth,
but	all	the	young	men	used	to	call	him	
Iros
,	because	he	would	run	and
give	messages	when	anyone	told	him.
This	man	had	come	to	chase	Odysseus	out	of	his	own	house
and	now	he	spoke,	insulting	him,	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	10
‘Give	way,	old	sir,	from	the	forecourt,	before	you	are	taken	and	dragged
out	by	the	foot.	Do	you	see	how	all	of	them	are	giving	the	signal	and
telling	me	to	drag	you.	Still,	I	am	ashamed	to	do	it.
So	up,	before	it	comes	to	a	battle	of	hands	between	us.’
Then	looking	at	him	darkly	resourceful	Odysseus	answered:
15	‘Strange	man,	I	am	doing	you	no	harm,	nor	speaking	any,
nor	am	I	jealous,	if	someone	takes	plenty	and	gives	it	to	you.
This	doorsill	is	big	enough	for	both	of	us,	nor	have	you	any	need	to	be
jealous	of	others.	I	think	you	are	a	vagabond
as	I	am	too.	Prosperity	is	in	the	gods'	giving.
20	Leave	blows	alone,	do	not	press	me	too	hard,	or	you	may	make	me	angry
so	that,	old	as	I	am,	I	may	give	you	a	bloody
chest	and	mouth.	Then	I	could	have	peace,	and	still	more	of	it	tomorrow,
for	I	do	not	think	you	will	make	your	way	back	here
Odysseus	challenged	by	the	beggar	Iros
a	second	time	to	the	house	of	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes.’
25	Then	in	anger	Iros	the	vagabond	said	to	him:	‘Shame	on	how	the	old	hulk
rolls	along	in	his	speech,	like	an	old	woman	at	the	oven.	I	have	some	bad
plans	for	him:
hit	him	with	both	hands,	and	spatter	all	of	the	teeth	out
from	his	jaws	on	the	ground,	as	if	he	were	a	wild	pig	rooting	30	the	crops.
Come,	tuck	up,	so	all	these	people	can	see	us
do	battle.	But	how	can	you	fight	against	a	man	who	is	younger?’
So,	in	front	of	the	towering	doors,	and	upon	the	threshold
polished	smooth,	these	two	hurled	jagged	words	at	each	other;	and
Antinoös,	the	sacred	prince,	stirred	them	on	to	battle,	35	and	laughing
sweetly	he	spoke	aloud	to	the	rest	of	the	suitors:	‘Friends,	in	the	past
nothing	has	ever	happened	to	match
this	entertainment	that	the	god	has	now	brought	to	the	palace;	for	the
stranger	and	Iros	are	now	making	ready	for	battle
with	their	fists.	Come,	let	the	rest	of	us	speed	the	encounter.’
40	So	he	spoke,	and	the	rest	of	them	all	sprang	up,	laughing,	and	gathered	all
in	a	group	around	the	two	ragged	beggars.
It	was	Antinoös	the	son	of	Eupeithes	who	spoke	to	them:
‘Listen	to	me,	you	haughty	suitors,	while	I	say	something.
Here	are	some	goat	paunches	set	on	the	fire;	we	filled	them	45	with	blood
and	fat,	and	set	them	there,	to	eat	after	supper.
Whichever	of	these	men	wins	the	contest,	and	is	proved	better,	let	him
come	up,	and	help	himself	to	whichever	he	likes	best;	and	he	shall	always
have	dinner	with	us,	nor	shall	we	ever	admit	any	other	beggar	to	join	us
inside,	and	beg	from	us.’
50	So	Antinoös	spoke,	and	what	he	had	said	was	pleasing.	But	now
resourceful	Odysseus,	with	crafty	thoughts,	said	to	him:	‘Friends,	it	is	not
possible	for	a	man	who	is	older
and	worn	with	sorrow	to	fight	with	a	younger	man,	but	my	villainous	belly
drives	me	to	do	it,	and	fall	to	his	fists.	Therefore,	55	come,	swear	me	a
strong	oath	all	of	you,	that	no	one
will	take	the	side	of	Iros	and	lightheartedly	strike	me
down	with	a	heavy	hand,	and	make	me	fall	to	his	onset.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	all	swore	him	the	oath	as	he	asked	it.
But	when	all	had	sworn	the	oath	and	made	an	end	of	their	swearing,	60	the
hallowed	prince	Telemachos	now	spoke	out	among	them:
‘Stranger,	if	your	heart	and	spirit	are	urgent	with	you
to	defend	yourself	against	this	man,	then	fear	no	other
The	suitors	have	them	fight
Achaian.	The	man	who	strikes	you	shall	have	to	fight	against	numbers.
I	myself	am	your	host,	with	the	assent	of	the	two	kings
65	Antinoös	and	Eurymachos,	both	men	of	prudence.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	all	applauded	him.	But	Odysseus
girded	up	his	rags	about	his	body,	displaying
his	thighs,	splendid	and	large,	and	one	could	see	the	wide	shoulders;	his
chest	showed,	and	his	ponderous	arms;	and	also	Athene
70	standing	close	beside	the	shepherd	of	the	people	magnified	his	limbs,	and
the	suitors	all	in	their	insolence	were	astonished,	and	thus	would	one	of
them	speak,	looking	over	at	his	next	neighbor:	‘Iros	will	soon	be	Iros	no
more,	with	himself	to	thank	for	the	evil.	See	what	limbs	the	old	man's	rags
have	uncovered.’
75	So	he	spoke,	and	the	heart	in	Iros	was	stirred	with	trouble,	but	even	so	the
thralls	girt	him	forcibly	up,	and	dragged	him	there.	He	was	frightened,	and
the	flesh	shook	all	over	his	body.
Antinoös	scolded	him	with	a	word	and	spoke	out	and	named	him:	‘I	do	not
care	if	you	live	or	die,	you	great	ox,	nor	what	happens	80	to	you,	when	you
are	afraid	of	this	man,	and	tremble	before	him,	an	old	man,	and	worn	with
the	sorrows	that	have	come	upon	him.
But	I	tell	you	this	straight	out,	and	it	will	be	a	thing	accomplished.
If	this	man	wins	the	fight	with	you,	and	is	proved	the	better,	I	will	throw
you	into	a	black	ship,	and	send	you	across	to	the	mainland,	85	to	
Echetos
,
who	preys	on	all	men,	and	who	is	king	there,	and	he	with	the	pitiless
bronze	will	cut	off	your	nose	and	ears,	and	tear	off	your	privates	and	give
them	raw	for	the	dogs	to	feed	on.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	trembling	even	more	took	hold	of
his	limbs,	but	they	pulled	him	on,	and	both	men	put	their	hands	up.
90	At	that	time,	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	pondered
whether	to	hit	him	so	that	the	life	would	go	out	of	him,	as	he	went	down,
or	only	to	stretch	him	out	by	hitting	him	lightly.
And	in	the	division	of	his	heart	this	way	seemed	best	to	him,	to	hit	him
lightly,	so	the	Achaians	would	not	be	suspicious.
95	They	put	up	their	hands,	and	Iros	hit	him	on	the	right	shoulder,	but
Odysseus	struck	the	neck	underneath	the	ear,	and	shattered	the	bones
within,	and	the	red	blood	came	in	his	mouth,	filling	it.
He	dropped,	bleating,	in	the	dust,	with	teeth	set	in	a	grimace,	and	kicking
at	the	ground	with	his	feet,	and	the	haughty	suitors	100	held	up	their	hands
and	died	with	laughing.	Meanwhile,	Odysseus	dragged	him	by	the	foot
through	the	porch,	till	he	came	to	the	courtyard
and	Iros	is	knocked	out
and	the	portico	doors,	and	propped	him	against	the	courtyard	wall,	sitting
up,	and	stuck	the	staff	in	his	hand,	to	hold	it.
Then	he	spoke	to	him	aloud	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	105	‘Sit
there	now,	and	scare	away	the	dogs	and	the	stray	pigs.
But	you	must	no	longer	try	to	be	king	of	the	strangers	and	beggars,	being
such	a	wretch,	or	you	may	win	yourself	still	more	evil.’
He	spoke,	and	threw	across	his	shoulders	his	ugly	wallet
that	was	full	of	holes,	with	a	twist	of	rope	attached	to	dangle	it.
110	He	went	back	to	the	sill	again	and	sat	down,	but	the	others	went	inside
again,	laughing	sweetly,	and	drank	to	him,	saying:	‘May	Zeus,	stranger,
and	all	the	other	immortals	give	you
what	you	want	most	of	all	and	what	is	dear	to	your	spirit,	for	having
stopped	the	wandering	of	this	greedy	creature
115	in	our	neighborhood.	Soon	we	will	take	him	across	to	the	mainland,	to
Echetos,	who	preys	on	all	men,	and	who	is	king	there.’
So	they	spoke,	and	great	Odysseus	was	pleased	at	the	omen.
Now	Antinoös	set	before	him	the	great	paunch	pudding
that	was	all	filled	with	fat	and	blood.	Amphinomos,	taking	120	two	loaves
of	bread	out	of	the	basket,	set	them	before	him,	and	drank	his	health	in	a
golden	cup	and	spoke	to	him,	saying:	‘Your	health,	father	and	stranger;
may	prosperous	days	befall	you	hereafter;	but	now	you	are	held	in	the	grip
of	many	misfortunes.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
125	‘Amphinomos,	you	seem	to	me	very	prudent,	being
the	son	of	such	a	father,	whose	excellent	fame	I	have	heard	of,	
Nisos
,	that
is,	of	Doulichion,	both	strong	and	prosperous;	they	say	you	are	his	son,	and
you	seem	like	a	man	well-spoken.
So	I	will	tell	you,	and	you	in	turn	understand	and	listen.
130	Of	all	creatures	that	breathe	and	walk	on	the	earth	there	is	nothing	more
helpless	than	a	man	is,	of	all	that	the	earth	fosters;	for	he	thinks	that	he
will	never	suffer	misfortune	in	future	days,	while	the	gods	grant	him
courage,	and	his	knees	have	spring	in	them.	But	when	the	blessed	gods
bring	sad	days	upon	him,	135	against	his	will	he	must	suffer	it	with
enduring	spirit.
For	the	mind	in	men	upon	earth	goes	according	to	the	fortunes	the	Father
of	Gods	and	Men,	day	by	day,	bestows	upon	them.
For	I	myself	once	promised	to	be	a	man	of	prosperity,
but,	giving	way	to	force	and	violence,	did	many	reckless
140	things,	because	I	relied	on	my	father	and	brothers.	Therefore,
Athene	inspires	Penelope
let	no	man	be	altogether	without	the	sense	of	righteousness,	but	take	in
silence	the	gifts	of	the	gods,	whatever	they	give	him.
Even	so,	now,	I	see	the	suitors,	their	reckless	devisings,	how	they	show	no
respect	to	the	wife,	and	despoil	the	possessions	145	of	a	man	who,	I	think,
will	not	for	long	be	far	from
his	country	and	friends.	He	is	very	close	by.	But	I	hope	your	destiny	takes
you	home,	out	of	his	way.	I	hope	you	never	will	face	him,	at	the	time	he
comes	back	to	the	beloved	land	of	his	fathers.
For	I	believe	that,	once	he	enters	his	halls,	there	will	be	150	a	reckoning,
not	without	blood,	between	that	man	and	the	suitors.’
So	he	spoke,	and	poured,	and	drank	the	honey-sweet	wine,	then
put	the	cup	back	into	the	hands	of	the	lord	of	the	people;	but	the	other	went
back	across	the	room,	heart	saddened	within	him,	shaking	his	head,	for	in
his	spirit	he	saw	the	evil,
155	but	still	could	not	escape	his	doom,	for	Athene	had	bound	him	fast,	to	be
strongly	killed	by	the	hands	and	spear	of	Telemachos.
He	went	back	and	sat	down	on	the	chair	from	which	he	had	risen.
But	now	the	goddess,	gray-eyed	Athene,	put	it	in	the	mind
of	the	daughter	of	Ikarios,	circumspect	Penelope,
160	to	show	herself	to	the	suitors,	so	that	the	might	all	the	more	open	their
hearts,	and	so	that	she	might	seem	all	the	more	precious	in	the	eyes	of	her
husband	and	son	even	than	she	had	been	before	this.
She	laughed,	in	an	idle	way,	and	spoke	to	her	nurse	and	named	her:
‘Eurynome,	my	heart	desires,	though	before	it	did	not,
165	to	show	myself	to	the	suitors,	although	I	still	hate	them.	Also,	I	would
speak	a	word	to	my	son,	and	that	would	be	for	the	better,	that	he	should
not	always	go	among	the	insolent	suitors,
who	speak	him	well,	but	are	plotting	evil	things	for	the	future.’
Eurynome	the	housekeeper	said	to	her	in	answer:
170	‘Now	all	this	you	have	said,	my	child,	was	fair	and	orderly.
Go	then,	and	speak	a	word	to	your	son,	hide	nothing.	Only
first	you	should	wash	your	body	and	anoint	your	face.	Do	not	go	down
with	a	face	so	ravaged	all	over	by	tears,	as	it	now	is,	since	nothing	is
gained	by	indiscriminate	sorrowing	always.
175	For	now	your	son	is	come	of	age,	and	you	know	you	always
prayed	the	immortals,	beyond	all	else,	to	see	him	bearded.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘Eurynome,	though	you	care	for	me,	do	not	speak	of	such	matters	as
washing	my	body	and	anointing	myself	with	unguents,
to	appear	before	the	suitors
180	seeing	that	the	gods,	they	who	possess	Olympos,	ruined
my	glory,	from	that	time	when	he	went	away	in	the	hollow
ships.	But	tell	
Autonoë
	and	
Hippodameia
to	come,	so	that	they	can	stand	at	my	side	in	the	great	hall.
I	will	not	go	alone	among	men.	I	think	that	immodest.’
185	So	she	spoke,	and	the	old	woman	went	away	through	the	palace,	and
brought	the	word	to	the	women,	and	urged	them	to	go	to	their	mistress.
Then	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	thought	what	to	do	next.
She	drifted	a	sweet	sleep	over	Ikarios'	daughter,
and	all	her	joints	were	relaxed	so	that	she	slumbered,	reclining	190	there
on	the	couch.	Meanwhile	she,	shining	among	goddesses,	endowed	her	with
gifts	immortal,	to	make	the	Achaians	admire	her.
First,	for	her	beauty's	sake,	she	freshened	all	her	fine	features	with
ambrosia,	such	as	fair-garlanded	Kythereia	uses
for	salve,	whenever	she	joins	the	lovely	dance	of	the	Graces.
195	She	made	her	taller	for	the	eye	to	behold,	and	thicker,
and	she	made	her	whiter	than	sawn	ivory.	After	so	doing,
she,	Athene,	shining	among	goddesses,	departed,
and	the	white-armed	handmaidens	came	running	in	from	the	great	hall,
with	clamor,	about	Penelope,	and	the	sweet	sleep	released	her.
200	She	rubbed	her	cheeks	with	both	her	hands	and	spoke	aloud,	saying:	‘That
was	a	strange	thing,	that	soft	sleep	that	shrouded	me.
How	I	wish	chaste	Artemis	would	give	me	a	death	so
soft,	and	now,	so	I	would	not	go	on	in	my	heart	grieving
all	my	life,	and	longing	for	love	of	a	husband	excellent
205	in	every	virtue,	since	he	stood	out	among	the	Achaians.’
So	she	spoke,	and	made	her	descent	from	her	shining	chamber,
not	all	alone,	since	two	handmaidens	went	to	attend	her.
When	she,	shining	among	women,	came	near	the	suitors,
she	stood	by	the	pillar	that	supported	the	roof	with	its	joinery,	210	holding
her	shining	veil	in	front	of	her	face,	to	shield	it,	and	a	devoted	attendant
was	stationed	on	either	side	of	her.
Their	knees	gave	way,	and	the	hearts	in	them	were	bemused	with	passion,
and	each	one	prayed	for	the	privilege	of	lying	beside	her;	but	she	spoke
rather	to	her	beloved	son,	Telemachos:
215	‘Telemachos,	your	mind	and	thoughts	are	no	longer	steadfast.
When	you	were	a	child	still,	you	had	better	thoughts	in	mind.	Now,	when
you	are	big,	and	come	to	the	measure	of	maturity,	and	one
Penelope	hints	at	marriage
who	saw	you,	some	outsider,	viewing	your	size	and	beauty,
would	say	you	were	the	son	born	of	a	prosperous	man;
220	your	thoughts	are	no	longer	righteous,	nor	your	perception;	such	a	thing
has	been	done	now,	here	in	our	palace,	and	you	permitted	our	stranger
guest	to	be	so	outrageously	handled.
How	must	it	be	now,	if	the	stranger	who	sits	in	our	household	is	to	be	made
to	suffer	so	from	bitter	brutality?
225	That	must	be	your	outrage	and	shame	as	people	see	it.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘My	mother,	I	cannot	complain	of	your	anger.	I	myself
notice	all	these	things	in	my	heart	and	know	of	them,	better	and	worse
alike,	but	before	now	I	was	only	an	infant;
230	but	still	I	cannot	see	my	way	to	the	wise	course	always,
for	these	men	come	from	one	place	or	another,	and	sit	beside	me	with	their
evil	thoughts,	and	distract	me,	and	there	are	none	here	to	help	me.
Yet	it	was	not	by	the	will	of	the	suitors	that	this	struggle	took	place
between	Iros	and	the	stranger,	and	he	was	stronger	than	Iros	235	in	battle.
O	father	Zeus,	and	Athene,	and	Apollo,
if	only	in	our	house,	in	such	a	manner,	the	suitors
could	be	defeated	and	bow	their	heads,	some	in	the	courtyard	and	some
inside	of	the	house,	and	the	limbs	be	unstrung	in	each	of	them;	as	now	for
Iros,	as	he	sits	over	there	by	the	courtyard
240	gates,	lolling	his	head	like	a	drunken	man,	and	unable
to	stand	upright	on	his	feet	again	and	make	his	way	homeward	to	wherever
he	makes	his	home,	since	there	is	no	strength	in	his	body.’
So	these	two	were	conversing	in	this	way	with	each	other;
but	Eurymachos	now	spoke	out	and	addressed	Penelope:
245	‘Daughter	of	Ikarios,	circumspect	Penelope,
if	only	all	the	Achaians	in	Iad	Argos	could	see	you,
at	dawn	of	day	tomorrow	there	would	be	even	more	suitors
come	to	feast	in	your	house,	since	you	surpass	all	women
for	beauty	and	stature	and	for	the	mind	well	balanced	within	you.’
250	Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘Eurymachos,	all	my
excellence,	my	beauty	and	figure,	were	ruined	by	the	immortals	at	that
time	when	the	Argives	took	ship	for	Ilion,	and	with	them	went	my
husband,	Odysseus.
If	he	were	to	come	back	to	me	and	take	care	of	my	life,	then	255	my
reputation	would	be	more	great	and	splendid.	As	it	is
but	also	at	presents
now,	I	grieve;	such	evils	the	god	has	let	loose	upon	me.
When	he	went	and	left	me	behind	in	the	land	of	his	fathers,	he	took	me	by
the	right	hand	at	the	wrist,	and	then	said	to	me:	“Dear	wife,	since	I	do	not
think	the	strong-greaved	Achaians	260	will	all	come	safely	home	from
Troy	without	hurt,	seeing
that	people	say	the	Trojans	are	men	who	can	fight	in	battle,	that	they	are
throwers	of	the	spear,	and	shooters	of	arrows,	and	riders	with	fast-footed
horses,	who	with	the	greatest
speed	settle	the	great	and	hateful	issue	of	common	battle,	265	I	do	not
know	if	the	god	will	spare	me,	or	if	I	must	be	lost	there	in	Troy;	here	let
everything	be	in	your	charge.
You	must	take	thought	for	my	father	and	mother	here	in	our	palace,	as	you
do	now,	or	even	more,	since	I	shall	be	absent.
But	when	you	see	our	son	grown	up	and	bearded,	then	you	may	270	marry
whatever	man	you	please,	forsaking	your	household.”
So	he	spoke	then;	and	now	all	this	is	being	accomplished.
And	there	will	come	that	night	when	a	hateful	marriage	is	given	to
wretched	me,	for	Zeus	has	taken	my	happiness	from	me.
But	this	thing	comes	as	a	bitter	distress	to	my	heart	and	spirit:	275	the
behavior	of	these	suitors	is	not	as	it	was	in	time	past	when	suitors	desired
to	pay	their	court	to	a	noble	woman
and	daughter	of	a	rich	man,	and	rival	each	other.	Such	men	themselves
bring	in	their	own	cattle	and	fat	sheep,	to	feast	the	family	of	the	bride,	and
offer	glorious	presents.
280	They	do	not	eat	up	another's	livelihood,	without	payment.’
She	spoke,	and	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	was	happy
because	she	beguiled	gifts	out	of	them,	and	enchanted	their	spirits	with
blandishing	words,	while	her	own	mind	had	other	intentions.
Then	Antinoös	the	son	of	Eupeithes	answered:
285	‘Daughter	of	Ikarios,	circumspect	Penelope,
whatever	gift	any	Achaian	wishes	to	bring	here,
take	it;	it	is	not	honorable	to	refuse	the	giving.
We	will	not	go	back	to	our	own	estates,	nor	will	we	go	elsewhere,	until	you
marry	whichever	Achaian	you	fancy.’
290	So	spoke	Antinoös,	and	his	word	pleased	the	rest	of	them.	Each	man	sent
his	herald	off	to	bring	back	the	presents.
Antinoös'	herald	brought	in	a	great	robe,	beautiful
and	elaborate,	and	in	it	were	twelve	double	pins,	golden
all	through,	and	fitted	with	bars	that	opened	and	closed	easily.
Odysseus	is	scolded	by	Melantho
295	Eurymachos'	man	came	back	with	an	elaborate	necklace
of	gold,	strung	with	bits	of	amber,	and	bright	as	sunshine.
Eurydamas'
	servants	came	back	bringing	a	pair	of	earrings	with	triple
drops	in	mulberry	clusters,	and	there	was	radiant	charm	in	them.	From	the
house	of	the	lord	
Peisandros
,	Polyktor's	300	son,	his	servant	brought	a
necklace,	a	wonderful	offering.
Each	of	the	Achaians	brought	a	different	beautiful
present;	and	she,	shining	among	women,	went	back	to	her	upper	room,	and
her	maidservants	carried	the	beautiful	presents	for	her.
But	now	the	suitors,	turning	to	the	dance	and	delightful
305	song,	took	their	pleasure	and	awaited	the	coming	of	evening,	and	the
black	night	came	on	as	they	were	taking	their	pleasure.
Accordingly,	they	set	up	three	cressets	about	the	palace,
to	give	them	light,	and	about	them	they	laid	piles	of	firewood	pieces,	long
dried	and	seasoned,	but	lately	split	with	the	brazen	310	ax;	and	put
kindling	in	with	it,	and	the	maids	of	enduring	Odysseus	were	ready	to	take
turns	keeping	them	burning,
when	illustrious	resourceful	Odysseus	himself	spoke	to	them:	‘You	maids
of	Odysseus,	whose	master	has	long	been	absent,	go	back	into	the	house
where	the	respected	queen	is,
315	and	in	her	presence	turn	your	distaffs,	and	sit	beside	her	in	the	halls,	and
comfort	her,	or	comb	your	wool	in	your	hands	there.
But	I	myself	will	provide	the	light	for	all	of	these	people.
And	even	if	they	wish	to	keep	at	it	until	the	high-throned	dawn,	they	will
not	wear	me	out.	I	am	very	enduring.’
320	So	he	spoke,	and	they	burst	out	laughing	and	looked	at	each	other;	but
Melantho
	of	the	lovely	face	shamefully	scolded	him.
Dolios	was	her	father,	but	Penelope	had	taken
her	in,	and	cared	for	her	like	a	daughter,	and	cheered	her	with	presents;	but
even	so	her	heart	had	no	sorrow	for	Penelope,
325	but	she	used	to	sleep	with	Eurymachos,	and	she	was	his	sweetheart.
Now	she	spoke	to	Odysseus	and	gave	him	a	scolding:
‘Wretched	stranger,	you	must	be	one	whose	wits	are	distracted,	when	you
will	not	go	where	the	smith	is	at	work,	and	sleep	there,	or	to	some	public
gathering	place,	but	staying	here	speak	out	330	boldly	and	at	length	among
many	men,	and	your	spirit
knows	no	fear.	The	wine	must	have	your	brains;	or	else	always	you	are
such	a	man	in	your	mind,	a	babbler	of	nonsense.
Are	you	so	brave	because	you	beat	the	vagabond	Iros?
and	taunted	by	Eurymachos
Take	care	lest	a	better	man	than	Iros	stand	up	against	you,	335	one	who	can
pummel	you	about	the	head	with	his	heavy
hands,	beat	you,	draw	blood,	and	chase	you	out	of	the	palace.’
Then	looking	at	her	darkly	resourceful	Odysseus	answered:
‘I	think	I	will	go	to	Telemachos,	you	bitch,	and	tell	him
how	you	are	talking,	so	that	he	will	cut	you	to	pieces.’
340	Speaking	in	words	like	this	he	fluttered	the	women.	They	went	on	their
way	back	into	the	house,	and	the	knees	of	each	one	went	loose	with	fear.
They	thought	he	was	speaking	the	truth.	He	then	took	his	place	by	the
burning	cressets,	and	kept	them	lighted,	looking	after	them	all	himself,	but
the	heart	within	him
345	was	pondering	other	thoughts,	which	were	not	to	go	unaccomplished.
But	Athene	did	not	altogether	permit	the	haughty
suitors	to	forgo	their	hard	insolence,	so	that	still	more
grief	would	invade	the	heart	of	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes.
Eurymachos,	son	of	Polybos,	began	speaking	among	them,
350	taunting	Odysseus,	and	started	up	laughter	among	his	companions:	‘Hear
me,	all	you	suitors	of	the	glorious	queen,	hear	me
while	I	speak	out	what	the	heart	within	my	breast	urges.
This	man	comes	as	gift	of	the	gods	to	the	house	of	Odysseus.
It	is	my	thought	that	he	can	give	us	illumination
355	from	his	bald	head,	which	has	no	hair,	not	even	a	little.’
So	he	spoke,	and	addressed	Odysseus,	sacker	of	cities:
‘Stranger,	if	I	were	to	take	you	up,	would	you	be	willing
to	work	for	me	on	my	outer	estate—I	would	give	you	adequate	pay—
assembling	stones	for	fences,	and	growing	the	tall	trees?
360	There	I	would	provide	you	with	an	allowance	of	victuals,
and	give	you	shoes	to	wear	on	your	feet,	and	clothing	to	put	on.
But	since	all	the	work	you	have	learned	is	bad,	you	will	not	be	willing	to
go	off	and	work	hard;	no,	you	would	rather	beg	where	the	people	are,	and
so	be	able	to	feed	that	ravenous	belly.’
365	Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Eurymachos,	I	wish	there	could	be	a	working	contest	between	us,	in	the
spring	season	when	the	days	are	lengthening,	out	in	the	meadow,	with
myself	holding	a	well-curved	sickle,	and	you	one	like	it,	so	to	test	our
endurance	for	labor,
370	without	food,	from	dawn	till	dark,	with	plenty	of	grass	for	our	mowing.
Or	if	it	were	oxen	to	be	driven,	those	of	the	best	sort,
large	ones	and	ruddy,	both	well	fed	with	grass,	of	an	equal
Eurymachos	throws	a	footstool	at	Odysseus
age	and	carrying	power,	and	their	strength	is	not	contemptible,	and	there
were	four	acres	to	plow,	with	the	glebe	giving	to	the	plowshare.
375	There	you	would	see	if	I	could	carve	a	continuous	furrow.
Or	again,	if	this	day	the	son	of	Kronos	should	bring	on
a	battle,	and	I	were	given	a	great	shield	and	two	spears,
and	a	helmet	all	of	bronze	well	fitted	over	my	temples,
so	you	would	see	me	taking	my	place	as	one	of	the	foremost	380	fighters,
and	you	could	not	speak	so	in	scorn	of	my	belly.
But	now	you	are	very	insulting,	and	think	to	be	short	with	me;	also,	as	I
suppose,	you	think	you	are	a	tall	man	and	powerful,
because	you	have	dealings	with	few	men	and	no	brave	ones;	surely,	if
Odysseus	were	to	come	back	to	the	land	of	his	fathers,
385	the	gates	of	the	house,	although	they	are	very	wide,	would	suddenly	be
too	narrow	as	you	took	flight	to	escape	from	the	forecourt.’
He	spoke,	and	the	anger	mounted	in	the	heart	of	Eurymachos,
and	looking	darkly	at	him	he	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	‘Wretch,	I
will	do	you	an	injury	for	the	way	you	are	talking,	390	boldly	and	at	length
among	many	men,	and	your	spirit
knows	no	fear.	The	wine	must	have	your	brains;	or	else	always	you	are
such	a	man	in	your	mind,	a	babbler	of	nonsense.
Are	you	so	brave	because	you	defeated	the	vagabond	Iros?’
So	he	spoke,	and	caught	up	a	footstool;	but	Odysseus
395	crouched	against	the	knees	of	Doulichian	Amphinomos
in	fear	of	Eurymachos,	who	threw,	and	hit	the	cupbearer
in	the	right	hand.	The	pitcher	fell	to	the	ground,	clashing,	but	the	cupbearer
fell	on	his	back	in	the	dust,	groaning.
But	the	suitors	all	through	the	shadowy	halls	were	raising	a	tumult,	400
and	thus	they	would	speak,	each	man	looking	at	the	man	next	him:	‘How	I
wish	this	stranger	could	have	gone	to	perdition
somewhere	else,	before	he	came	here;	he	has	raised	such	a	tumult,	and	now
we	are	fighting	over	beggars;	there	will	be	no	pleasure	in	the	stately	feast
at	all,	since	vile	things	will	be	uppermost.’
405	Now	the	hallowed	prince	Telemachos	spoke	a	word	to	them:	‘Fools,	you
are	out	of	your	minds	and	no	longer	conceal	inside	you	what	you	have
eaten	and	drunk.	It	must	be	some	god	who	troubles	you.
You	have	feasted	well;	go	to	your	homes	and	sleep,	whenever,	that	is,
anyone	desires	to	go	home;	I	drive	away	no	man.’
410	So	he	spoke,	and	all	of	them	bit	their	lips	in	amazement	at	Telemachos,
and	the	daring	way	he	had	spoken	to	them.
The	suitors	go	home
Now	they	were	addressed	and	spoken	to	by	Amphinomos,
the	glorious	son	of	Nisos,	son	of	the	lord	Aretios:
‘Dear	friends,	no	man	must	be	angry,	nor	yet	with	violent
415	answers	attack	what	has	been	spoken	in	justice.	And	do	not	strike	the
stranger,	as	you	have	done,	nor	yet	any	other
serving	man	who	is	in	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus.
Come	now,	let	the	cupbearer	pour	wine	in	our	goblets,
so	we	can	pour	a	libation	and	then	retire	to	our	houses;
420	and	in	the	halls	of	Odysseus	we	shall	let	Telemachos
look	after	the	stranger,	since	it	is	his	house	that	he	came	to.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	word	he	spoke	was	pleasing	to	all	of	them.
The	hero	
Moulios
,	the	Doulichian	herald,	mixed	them	wine	in	the	bowl.	He
was	the	henchman	of	Amphinomos.
425	He	passed	it	around	to	all	in	order,	and	they,	pouring
a	libation	to	the	blessed	gods,	drank	the	honey-sweet	wine.
But	when	they	had	made	libation	and	drunk	as	much	as	they	wanted,	then
they	went	home	to	go	to	bed,	each	man	to	his	own	house.
BOOK	XIX
Now	great	Odysseus	still	remained	in	the	hall,	pondering	how,	with	the
help	of	Athene,	he	would	murder	the	suitors.
Presently	he	spoke	in	winged	words	to	Telemachos:
‘Telemachos,	we	must	have	the	weapons	stored	away	inside	5	the	high
chamber;	and	when	the	suitors	miss	them	and	ask	you	about	them,	answer
and	beguile	them	with	soft	words,	saying:	“I	stored	them	away	out	of	the
smoke,	since	they	are	no	longer	like	what	Odysseus	left	behind	when	he
went	to	Troy	land,	but	are	made	foul,	with	all	the	smoke	of	the	fire	upon
them.
10	Also,	some	divinity	put	into	my	head	this	even
greater	thought,	that	with	the	wine	in	you,	you	might	stand	up	and	fight,
and	wound	each	other,	and	spoil	the	feast	and	the	courting;	since	iron	all	of
itself	works	on	a	man	and	attracts	him.”’
So	he	spoke,	and	Telemachos	obeyed	his	dear	father,
15	and	summoned	out	Eurykleia	his	nurse,	and	said	to	her:
‘Come,	nurse,	please	detain	the	women	inside	the	palace,	while	I	put	away
my	father's	beautiful	armor
in	the	inner	room;	it	is	carelessly	laid	in	the	house,	and	darkened	with
smoke,	in	my	father's	absence,	and	I	was	a	child	all	that	time.
20	Now	I	would	put	it	away,	where	smoke	from	the	fire	will	not	reach	it.’
Then	in	turn	Eurykleia	his	dear	nurse	said	to	him:
‘I	only	hope,	my	child,	that	you	will	assume	such	foresight	in	taking	care
of	the	house	and	protecting	all	our	possessions.
But	tell	me,	who	is	it	will	go	with	you	and	hold	the	light	for	you?
Odysseus	and	Telemachos	remove	the	armor
25	The	maids	would	have	given	you	light,	but	you	would	not	let	them	come
out.
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘This	stranger	will.	I	will	not	suffer	a	man	who	feeds	from	our	stores,	and
does	not	work,	even	though	he	comes	from	far	off.’
So	he	spoke,	and	she	had	no	winged	words	for	an	answer.
30	Eurykleia	barred	the	doors	of	the	strong-built	great	hall.
The	two	men,	Odysseus	and	his	glorious	son,	sprang	up
and	began	carrying	helmets,	shields	massive	in	the	middle,	and	pointed
spears,	and	before	them	Pallas	Athene,	holding	a	golden	lamp,	gave	them
splendid	illumination.
35	Suddenly	Telemachos	spoke	a	word	to	his	father:
‘Father,	here	is	a	great	wonder	that	my	eyes	look	on.
Always	it	seems	that	the	chamber	walls,	the	handsome	bases	and	roof
timbers	of	fir	and	tall	columns	sustaining	them,	shine	in	my	eyes	as	if	a	fire
were	blazing.	There	must	be	40	surely	a	god	here,	one	of	those	who	hold
the	high	heaven.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Hush,	and	keep	it	in	your	own	mind,	and	do	not	ask	questions.
For	this	is	the	very	way	of	the	gods,	who	hold	Olympos.
You	should	now	go	to	bed,	and	I	shall	remain	behind	here,	45	so	that	I	can
continue	to	stir	up	the	maids,	and	also
your	mother;	and	she	in	her	sorrow	will	question	me	about	everything.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Telemachos	went	out	of	the	great	hall
to	his	own	chamber	to	go	to	bed,	with	torches	to	light	him	to	his	bed,
where	he	always	lay	when	sweet	sleep	came	on	him.
50	There	he	lay	this	time	also	and	waited	for	the	divine	Dawn,	while	great
Odysseus	still	remained	in	the	hall,	pondering	how,	with	the	help	of
Athene,	he	would	murder	the	suitors.
But	now	circumspect	Penelope	came	down	from	her	chamber,
looking	like	Artemis	or	like	golden	Aphrodite.
55	They	set	a	chair	for	her	to	sit	on	close	by	the	fireplace.
The	chair	was	inlaid	with	ivory	and	silver;	the	craftsman	
Ikmalios
	had
made	it,	and	for	the	feet	he	had	joined	on	a	footstool,	all	of	one	piece	with
it;	a	great	fleece	was	spread	out	over	the	chair,	and	upon	it	circumspect
Penelope
60	took	her	place.	Her	white-armed	handmaidens	came	from	the	palace.
They	cleared	and	carried	away	a	great	deal	of	food,	with	the	tables	and
goblets,	where	the	men	in	high	spirits	had	been	drinking,	and	shook	the	ash
from	the	cressets	onto	the	ground,	then	piled	them
Interview	between	Odysseus	and	Penelope
again	with	pieces	of	wood,	to	give	them	light,	and	to	warm	them.
65	Again	for	the	second	time	Melantho	scolded	Odysseus:
‘Stranger,	do	you	mean	to	stay	here	all	night	and	bother	us	by	poking	all
over	the	house	and	spying	upon	the	women?
Take	yourself	out	of	the	door,	you	wretch,	and	be	well	satisfied	with	your
feast,	or	you	may	be	forced	to	get	out,	with	a	torch	thrown	at	you.’
70	Then	looking	darkly	at	her	resourceful	Odysseus	said	to	her:	‘I	wonder,
why	do	you	hold	such	an	angry	grudge	against	me?
Is	it	because	I	am	dirty,	and	wear	foul	clothing	upon	me,	and	go	about	as	a
public	beggar?	The	need	is	on	me,
for	such	is	the	lot	of	vagabonds	and	men	who	are	homeless.
75	I	too	was	one	who	lived	in	my	own	house	among	people,
prospering	in	wealth,	and	often	I	gave	to	a	wanderer
according	to	what	he	was	and	wanted	when	he	came	to	me;
and	I	had	serving	men	by	thousands,	and	many	another
good	thing,	by	which	men	live	well	and	are	called	prosperous,	only	80
Zeus,	son	of	Kronos,	spoiled	it	all—somehow	he	wished	to.
So,	woman,	you	should	now	beware	lest	you	lose	all	of
that	glorious	look	with	which	you	shine	among	the	handmaidens.
Beware	of	your	mistress,	who	may	grow	angry	with	you	and	hate	you.
Or	Odysseus	may	come	back.	There	is	still	time	for	hope	there.
85	And	even	if	he	has	perished	and	will	no	longer	come	back,	here	is
Telemachos,	his	son,	by	grace	of	Apollo
grown	such	a	man,	and	in	his	palace	none	of	the	women
will	be	sinful	and	escape,	since	he	is	a	child	no	longer.’
So	he	spoke,	and	circumspect	Penelope	heard	him,
90	and	spoke	to	her	maidservant	by	name	and	gave	her	a	scolding:	‘Always	I
know	well	what	monstrous	thing	you	are	doing,
you	bold	and	shameless	bitch;	you	will	wipe	it	off	on	your	own	head.
You	understood	all	this	very	well,	because	you	had	heard	it	from	me,	how
in	my	halls	I	intended	to	question	the	stranger	95	about	my	husband;	since
I	am	troubled	for	him	incessantly.’
So	she	spoke	and	addressed	her	housekeeper,	Eurynome:
‘Eurynome,	bring	up	a	chair	and	put	a	fleece	on	it,
so	that	the	stranger	can	be	seated,	and	tell	me	his	story,	and	listen	also	to
what	I	say.	I	wish	to	question	him.’
100	So	she	spoke,	and	the	servant	quickly	brought	up	and	set	down	a	well-
polished	chair,	and	laid	a	fleece	across	to	cover	it.
who	tells	her	story
On	this,	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	was	seated,
and	their	discourse	was	begun	by	circumspect	Penelope:
‘Stranger,	I	myself	first	have	a	question	to	ask	you.
105	What	man	are	you	and	whence?	Where	is	your	city?	Your	parents?’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
‘Lady,	no	mortal	man	on	the	endless	earth	could	have	cause	to	find	fault
with	you;	your	fame	goes	up	into	the	wide	heaven,	as	of	some	king	who,	as
a	blameless	man	and	god-fearing,	110	and	ruling	as	lord	over	many
powerful	people,
upholds	the	way	of	good	government,	and	the	black	earth	yields	him	barley
and	wheat,	his	trees	are	heavy	with	fruit,	his	sheepflocks	continue	to	bear
young,	the	sea	gives	him	fish,	because	of	his	good	leadership,	and	his
people	prosper	under	him.
115	Question	me	now	here	in	your	house	about	all	other
matters,	but	do	not	ask	who	I	am,	the	name	of	my	country,	for	fear	you
may	increase	in	my	heart	its	burden	of	sorrow	as	I	think	back;	I	am	very
full	of	grief,	and	I	should	not	sit	in	the	house	of	somebody	else	with	my
lamentation
120	and	wailing.	It	is	not	good	to	go	on	mourning	forever.
Some	one	of	your	maids,	or	you	yourself,	might	find	fault	with	me	and	say
I	swam	in	tears	because	my	brain	drowned	in	liquor.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Stranger,	all	of	my	excellence,	my	beauty	and	figure,
125	were	ruined	by	the	immortals	at	that	time	when	the	Argives	took	ship	for
Ilion,	and	with	them	went	my	husband,	Odysseus.
If	he	were	to	come	back	to	me	and	take	care	of	my	life,	then	my	reputation
would	be	more	great	and	splendid.	As	it	is	now,	I	grieve;	such	evils	the	god
has	let	loose	upon	me.
130	For	all	the	greatest	men	who	have	the	power	in	the	islands,	in	Doulichion
and	Same	and	in	wooded	Zakynthos,
and	all	who	in	rocky	Ithaka	are	holders	of	lordships,
all	these	are	my	suitors	against	my	will,	and	they	wear	my	house	out.
Therefore,	I	pay	no	attention	to	strangers,	nor	to	suppliants,	135	nor	yet	to
heralds,	who	are	in	the	public	service,	but	always	I	waste	away	at	the
inward	heart,	longing	for	Odysseus.
These	men	try	to	hasten	the	marriage.	I	weave	my	own	wiles.
First	the	divinity	put	the	idea	of	the	web	in	my	mind,
to	set	up	a	great	loom	in	my	palace,	and	set	to	weaving
140	a	web	of	threads,	long	and	fine.	Then	I	said	to	them:
Odysseus	pretends
“Young	men,	my	suitors	now	that	the	great	Odysseus	has	perished,	wait,
though	you	are	eager	to	marry	me,	until	I	finish
this	web,	so	that	my	weaving	will	not	be	useless	and	wasted.
This	is	a	shroud	for	the	hero	Laertes,	for	when	the	destructive	145	doom	of
death	which	lays	men	low	shall	take	him,	lest	any	Achaian	woman	in	this
neighborhood	hold	it	against	me
that	a	man	of	many	conquests	lies	with	no	sheet	to	wind	him.”
So	I	spoke,	and	the	proud	heart	in	them	was	persuaded.
Thereafter	in	the	daytime	I	would	weave	at	my	great	loom,	150	but	in	the
night	I	would	have	torches	set	by,	and	undo	it.
So	for	three	years	I	was	secret	in	my	designs,	convincing	the	Achaians,	but
when	the	fourth	year	came	with	the	seasons	returning,	and	the	months
faded,	and	many	days	had	been	brought	to	completion,	then	at	last	through
my	maidservants,	those	careless	hussies,	155	they	learned,	and	came	upon
me	and	caught	me,	and	gave	me	a	scolding.
So,	against	my	will	and	by	force,	I	had	to	finish	it.
Now	I	cannot	escape	from	this	marriage;	I	can	no	longer
think	of	another	plan;	my	parents	are	urgent	with	me
to	marry;	my	son	is	vexed	as	they	eat	away	our	livelihood;	160	he	sees	it
all;	he	is	a	grown	man	now,	most	able
to	care	for	the	house,	and	it	is	to	him	Zeus	grants	this	honor.
But	even	so,	tell	me	who	you	are,	and	the	place	where	you	come	from.
You	were	not	born	from	any	fabulous	oak,	or	a	boulder.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
165	‘O	respected	wife	of	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes,
you	will	not	stop	asking	me	about	my	origin?
Then	I	will	tell	you;	but	you	will	give	me	over	to	sorrows	even	more	than	I
have;	but	such	is	the	way	of	it,	when	one	strays	away	from	his	own	country
as	long	as	I	have,
170	wandering	many	cities	of	men	and	suffering	hardships.
Even	so,	I	will	tell	you	what	you	ask	me	and	seek	for.
There	is	a	land	called	Crete	in	the	middle	of	the	wine-blue	water,	a
handsome	country	and	fertile,	seagirt,	and	there	are	many	peoples	in	it,
innumerable;	there	are	ninety	cities.
175	Language	with	language	mix	there	together.	There	are	Achaians,	there	are
great-hearted	
Eteokretans
,	there	are	Kydonians,	and	
Dorians
	in	three
divisions,	and	noble	
Pelasgians
;	and	there	is	
Knossos
,	the	great	city,	the
place	where	
Minos
was	king	for	nine-year	periods,	and	conversed	with	great	Zeus.
to	have	entertained	Odysseus	in	Crete
180	He	was	the	father	of	my	father,	great-hearted	Deukalion.
Deukalion
	had	two	sons,	myself	and	the	lord	Idomeneus,	but	Idomeneus
had	gone	with	the	curved	ships	to	Ilion
along	with	the	sons	of	Atreus.	My	glorious	name	was	
Aithon
,	and	I	was	the
younger	born,	but	he	was	the	elder	and	better.
185	It	was	there	that	I	knew	Odysseus	and	entertained	him,
for	the	force	of	the	wind	had	caught	him,	as	he	was	making	for	Ilion,	and
brought	him	to	Crete,	driving	him	off	course	past	Maleia.
He	stopped	at	
Amnisos
,	where	there	is	a	cave	of	
Eileithyia
,	in	difficult
harbors,	and	barely	he	had	escaped	from	the	stormwind.
190	He	went	up	to	the	town	at	once,	and	asked	for	Idomeneus,	for	he	said	he
was	his	hereditary	friend,	and	respected;	but	it	was	now	the	tenth	or
eleventh	day	since	Idomeneus	had	gone	away	along	with	his	curved	ships
for	Ilion.
But	I	took	him	back	to	my	own	house,	and	well	entertained	him	195	with
proper	hospitality,	since	there	was	abundance
in	the	house,	and	for	his	other	companions,	who	were	his	followers,	I
collected	from	the	public	and	gave	them	barley,	and	shining	wine,	and
cattle	to	dedicate,	to	content	their	spirits.
There	the	noble	Achaians	stayed	twelve	days,	for	a	mighty	200	North
Wind	contained	them,	such	that	a	man	could	not	stand	upright	and	walk	the
earth.	Some	harsh	divinity	must	have	roused	it.
But	on	the	thirteenth	day	the	wind	fell,	and	they	put	forth.’
He	knew	how	to	say	many	false	things	that	were	like	true	sayings.
As	she	listened	her	tears	ran	and	her	body	was	melted,
205	as	the	snow	melts	along	the	high	places	of	the	mountains	when	the	West
Wind	has	piled	it	there,	but	the	South	Wind	melts	it,	and	as	it	melts	the
rivers	run	full	flood.	It	was	even
so	that	her	beautiful	cheeks	were	streaming	tears,	as	Penelope	wept	for	her
man,	who	was	sitting	there	by	her	side.	But	Odysseus	210	in	his	heart	had
pity	for	his	wife	as	she	mourned	him,
but	his	eyes	stayed,	as	if	they	were	made	of	horn	or	iron,	steady	under	his
lids.	He	hid	his	tears	and	deceived	her.
But	when	she	had	taken	her	pleasure	of	tearful	lamentation,	then	she
answered	him	once	again	and	spoke	and	addressed	him:	215	‘Now,	my
friend,	I	think	I	will	give	you	a	test,	to	see	if	it	is	true	that	there,	and	with
his	godlike	companions,
you	entertained	my	husband,	as	you	say	you	did,	in	your	palace.
Tell	me	what	sort	of	clothing	he	wore	on	his	body,	and	what	sort
He	claims	Odysseus	is	in	Thesprotia
of	man	he	was	himself,	and	his	companions,	who	followed	him.’
220	Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:	‘Lady,	it	is
difficult	to	tell	you,	with	so	much	time	between,	for	now	it	is	the	twentieth
year	since
he	was	in	that	place	and	went	away	from	my	country.
Still,	I	will	tell	you,	in	the	way	my	heart	imagines	him.
225	Great	Odysseus	was	wearing	a	woolen	mantle	of	purple,
with	two	folds,	but	the	pin	to	it	was	golden	and	fashioned	with	double
sheathes,	and	the	front	part	of	it	was	artfully	done:	a	hound	held	in	his
forepaws	a	dappled
fawn,	preying	on	it	as	it	struggled;	and	all	admired	it,	230	how,	though	they
were	golden,	it	preyed	on	the	fawn	and	strangled	it	and	the	fawn	struggled
with	his	feet	as	he	tried	to	escape	him.
I	noticed	also	the	shining	tunic	that	he	was	wearing
on	his	body.	It	was	like	the	dried-out	skin	of	an	onion,	so	sheer	it	was	and
soft,	and	shining	bright	as	the	sun	shines.
235	Many	of	the	women	were	looking	at	it	in	admiration.
But	put	away	in	your	heart	this	other	thing	that	I	tell	you.
I	do	not	know	if	this	clothing	Odysseus	wore	had	come	from	his	home,	or
if	some	companion	gave	it	to	him	as	he	boarded	his	fast	ship;	or	some
friend	abroad,	since	Odysseus	had	friendship	240	with	many	men.	Indeed,
there	were	few	Achaians	like	him.
I	myself	gave	him	a	brazen	sword	and	a	double
cloak	of	purple,	a	handsome	thing,	and	a	fringed	tunic,
and	saw	him	off	in	the	proper	way	on	his	strong-benched	vessel.
Also	there	was	a	herald,	a	little	older	than	he	was,
245	who	went	with	him.	I	will	describe	to	you	what	he	looked	like.
He	was	round	in	the	shoulders,	black-complexioned,	wooly-haired,	and
had	the	name	
Eurybates
.	Odysseus	prized	him	above	his	other	companions,
for	their	thoughts	were	in	harmony.’
He	spoke,	and	still	more	aroused	in	her	the	passion	for	weeping,	250	as
she	recognized	the	certain	proofs	Odysseus	had	given.
But	when	she	had	taken	her	pleasure	of	tearful	lamentation,	then	once
again	she	spoke	to	him	and	gave	him	an	answer:	‘Stranger,	while	before
this	you	had	my	pity,	you	now	shall	be	my	friend	and	be	respected	here	in
my	palace.
255	For	I	myself	gave	him	this	clothing,	as	you	describe	it.
I	folded	it	in	my	chamber,	and	I	too	attached	the	shining	pin,	to	be	his
adornment;	but	I	shall	never	welcome	him
and	nearing	home
home,	come	back	again	to	the	beloved	land	of	his	fathers.
It	was	on	a	bad	day	for	him	that	Odysseus	boarded
260	his	hollow	ship	for	that	evil,	not-to-be-mentioned	Ilion.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
‘O	respected	wife	of	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes,
no	longer	waste	your	beautiful	skin	nor	eat	your	heart	out	in	lamentation
for	your	husband.	Yet	I	do	not	blame	you.
265	For	any	woman	mourns	when	she	loses	her	wedded	husband,	with	whom
she	has	lain	in	love	and	borne	children,	even	a	lesser	man	than	Odysseus.
They	say	that	he	was	like	the	immortals.
But	now	give	over	your	lamentation,	and	mark	what	I	tell	you,	for	I	say	to
you	without	deception,	without	concealment,	270	that	I	have	heard	of	the
present	homecoming	of	Odysseus.
He	is	near,	in	the	rich	land	of	the	men	of	Thesprotia,
and	alive,	and	bringing	many	treasures	back	to	his	household.
He	collects	this	about	the	district.	His	eager	companions	were	lost	to	him,
with	his	hollow	ship,	on	the	wine-blue	water	275	as	he	left	the	island	of
Thrinakia,	for	Zeus	and	Helios	hated	him,	since	his	companions	killed	the
cattle	of	Helios.
So	they	all	perished	in	the	wash	of	the	great	sea;	only
Odysseus,	riding	the	keel,	was	cast	ashore	by	the	sea	swell	on	the	land	of
the	Phaiakians,	who	are	near	the	immortals;	280	and	they	honored	him	in
their	hearts	as	if	he	had	been	a	divinity,	and	gave	him	much,	and	they
themselves	were	willing	to	carry	him	home	without	harm.	So	Odysseus
would	have	been	home	a	long	time	before	this,	but	in	his	mind	he	thought
it	more	profitable	to	go	about	and	visit	much	country,	collecting
possessions.
285	For	Odysseus	knew	profitable	ways	beyond	all	other
men	who	are	mortal,	no	other	man	could	rival	him	at	it.
So	Pheidon,	king	of	the	Thesprotians,	told	me	the	story;	and	he	swore	to
me	in	my	presence,	as	he	poured	out	a	libation	in	his	house,	that	the	ship
was	drawn	down	to	the	sea,	and	the	crew	were	ready	290	to	carry
Odysseus	back	again	to	his	own	dear	country;
but	before	that	he	sent	me	off,	for	a	ship	of	Thesprotian	men	happened	then
to	be	sailing	for	Doulichion,	rich	in	wheatfields.
And	he	showed	me	all	the	possessions	gathered	in	by	Odysseus;	these
would	feed	a	succession	of	heirs	to	the	tenth	generation,	295	so	many
treasures	are	stored	for	him	in	the	house	of	the	great	king.
Eurykleia	is	told
But	he	said	Odysseus	had	gone	to	Dodona,	to	listen
to	the	will	of	Zeus,	out	of	the	holy	deep-leaved	oak	tree,	for	how	he	could
come	back	to	the	rich	countryside	of	Ithaka,	in	secret	or	openly,	having
been	by	now	long	absent.
300	So	he	is	safe,	as	you	see,	and	is	now	coming	back.	He	is	very	close	at
hand,	and	will	not	for	long	be	far	from	his	country	and	his	own	people.	I
will	swear	you	a	firm	oath	to	this.
Zeus	be	my	witness,	first	of	the	gods,	and	the	table	of	friendship,	and	the
hearth	of	blameless	Odysseus,	to	which	I	come	as	a	suppliant,	305	all	these
things	are	being	accomplished	in	the	way	I	tell	them.
Some	time	within	this	very	year	Odysseus	will	be	here,
either	at	the	waning	of	the	moon	or	at	its	onset.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘If	only	this	word,	stranger	and	guest,	were	brought	to	fulfillment,	310
soon	you	would	be	aware	of	my	love	and	many	gifts	given	by	me,	so	any
man	who	met	you	would	call	you	blessed.
But	here	is	the	way	I	think	in	my	mind,	and	the	way	it	will	happen.
Odysseus	will	never	come	home	again,	nor	will	you	be	given	conveyance,
for	there	are	none	to	give	orders	left	in	the	household	315	such	as
Odysseus	was	among	men—if	he	ever	existed—	for	receiving	respected
strangers	and	sending	them	off	on	their	journeys.
But	come,	handmaidens,	give	him	a	wash	and	spread	a	couch	for	him	here,
with	bedding	and	coverlets	and	with	shining	blankets,	so	that	he	can	keep
warm	as	he	waits	for	Dawn	of	the	golden	320	throne,	and	early	tomorrow
you	shall	give	him	a	bath,	anoint	him,	so	that	he	can	sit	in	the	hall	beside
Telemachos
and	expect	to	dine	there;	and	it	will	be	the	worse	for	any	of	those	men	who
inflicts	heart-wasting	annoyance	on	him;	he	will	accomplish	nothing	here
for	all	his	terrible
325	spite;	for	how,	my	friend,	will	you	learn	if	I	in	any	way	surpass	the	rest	of
women,	in	mind	and	thoughtful	good	sense,	if	you	must	attend,	badly
dressed	and	unwashed,	the	feasting	in	the	palace?	Human	beings	live	for
only	a	short	time,
and	when	a	man	is	harsh	himself,	and	his	mind	knows	harsh	thoughts,	330
all	men	pray	that	sufferings	will	befall	him	hereafter
while	he	lives;	and	when	he	is	dead	all	men	make	fun	of	him.
But	when	a	man	is	blameless	himself,	and	his	thoughts	are	blameless,	the
friends	he	has	entertained	carry	his	fame	widely
to	all	mankind,	and	many	are	they	who	call	him	excellent.’
to	wash	Odysseus'	feet
335
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:	‘O	respected
wife	of	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes,	coverlets	and	shining	rugs	have	been
hateful	to	me
ever	since	that	time	when	I	left	the	snowy	mountains
of	Crete	behind	me,	and	went	away	on	my	long-oared	vessel.
340	I	will	lie	now	as	I	have	lain	before	through	the	sleepless	nights;	for	many
have	been	the	nights	when	on	an	unpleasant	couch	I	lay	and	awaited	the
throned	Dawn	in	her	splendor.
Nor	is	there	any	desire	in	my	heart	for	foot	basins,	to	wash	my	feet,	nor
shall	any	woman	lay	hold	of	my	feet,	not	one	345	of	those	such	as	do	your
work	for	you	in	your	palace;
not	unless	there	is	some	aged	and	virtuous	woman
whose	heart	has	had	to	endure	as	many	troubles	as	mine	has.
If	such	a	one	were	to	touch	my	feet,	I	should	not	be	angry.’
Then	in	turn	circumspect	Penelope	answered:
350	‘Dear	friend,	never	before	has	there	been	any	man	so	thoughtful,	among
those	friends	from	far	places	who	have	come	to	my	palace	as	guests,	so
thoughtful	and	so	well-considered	is	everything	you	say.	I	do	have	one	old
woman,	whose	thoughts	are	prudent,	who	was	nurse	to	that	unhappy	man,
and	took	good	care	of	him.
355	She	took	him	up	in	her	hands	when	first	his	mother	had	borne	him,	and
she	shall	wash	your	feet,	though	she	has	little	strength	for	it.
Come	then,	circumspect	Eurykleia,	rise	up	and	wash
the	feet	of	one	who	is	the	same	age	as	your	master.	Odysseus	must	by	this
time	have	just	such	hands	and	feet	as	you	do,	360	for	in	misfortune	mortal
men	grow	old	more	suddenly.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	old	woman	covered	her	face	in	her	hands,
and	shed	hot	tears,	and	spoke	to	him	in	words	of	compassion:	‘How
helpless	I	am	to	help	you,	my	child.	Surely	Zeus	hated	you	beyond	all
other	men,	though	you	had	a	godly	spirit;
365	for	no	man	among	mortals	ever	has	burned	so	many
thigh	pieces	to	Zeus	who	delights	in	the	thunder,	nor	given	so	many	choice
and	grand	sacrifices,	as	you	prayed	you	might	come	to	a	sleek	old	age,	and
raise	your	glorious	son	to	manhood.
Now	for	you	alone	he	took	away	your	day	of	homecoming.
370	So	it	must	be	for	him	also	that	in	the	houses	of	far-off	friends,	whose
famous	homes	he	enters,	the	women	tease	him,	as	now	these	sluts	are	all
teasing	you,	stranger,	and	it	is	to	avoid	their	abuse	and	shameful	speaking
you	will	not	let	them
The	scar	of	Odysseus
wash	your	feet.	But	circumspect	Penelope,	daughter
375	of	Ikarios	told	me	to	do	it,	nor	am	I	unwilling.
So	I	shall	wash	your	feet,	both	for	the	sake	of	Penelope	but	also	for
yourself,	since	the	heart	is	stirred	within	me	by	sorrows;	but	come,	attend
to	me	and	the	word	I	tell	you.
There	have	been	many	hard-traveling	strangers	who	have	come	here,	380
but	I	say	I	have	never	seen	one	as	like	as	you	are
to	Odysseus,	both	as	to	your	feet,	and	voice	and	appearance.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
‘So	all	say,	old	dame,	who	with	their	eyes	have	looked	on	the	two	of	us.
They	say	we	two	are	very	similar
385	each	to	each,	as	you	yourself	have	noticed	and	tell	me.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	old	woman	took	up	the	shining	basin
she	used	for	foot	washing,	and	poured	in	a	great	deal	of	water,	the	cold
first,	and	then	she	added	the	hot	to	it.	Now	Odysseus
was	sitting	close	to	the	fire,	but	suddenly	turned	to	the	dark	side;	390	for
presently	he	thought	in	his	heart	that,	as	she	handled	him,	she	might	be
aware	of	his	scar,	and	all	his	story	might	come	out.
She	came	up	close	and	washed	her	lord,	and	at	once	she	recognized	that
scar,	which	once	the	boar	with	his	white	tusk	had	inflicted	on	him,	when	he
went	to	
Parnassos
,	to	Autolykos	and	his	children.
395	This	was	his	mother's	noble	father,	who	surpassed	all	men	in	thievery	and
the	art	of	the	oath,	and	the	god	Hermes
himself	had	endowed	him,	for	he	had	pleased	him	by	burning	the	thigh
bones	of	lambs	and	kids,	and	the	god	freely	gave	him	his	favor.
Autolykos	came	once	to	the	rich	country	of	Ithaka,
400	and	found	that	a	child	there	was	newly	born	to	his	daughter;	and,	as	he
finished	his	evening	meal,	Eurykleia	laid	him	upon	his	very	knees,	and
spoke	him	a	word	and	named	him:	‘Autolykos,	now	find	yourself	that
name	you	will	bestow
on	your	own	child's	dear	child,	for	you	have	prayed	much	to	have	him.’
405	Then	Autolykos	spoke	to	her	and	gave	her	an	answer:	‘My	son-in-law	and
daughter,	give	him	the	name	I	tell	you;	since	I	have	come	to	this	place
distasteful	to	many,	women	and	men	alike	on	the	prospering	earth,	so	let
him	be	given	the	name	Odysseus,	that	is	distasteful.	Then	when	he	grows
up,	410	and	comes	to	the	great	house	of	his	mother's	line,	and	Parnassos,
where	there	are	possessions	that	are	called	mine,	I	will	give	him
and	the	story	of	his	name
freely	of	these	to	make	him	happy,	and	send	him	back	to	you.’
This	was	why	Odysseus	came,	so	that	he	would	give	him
glorious	presents.	Autolykos	and	the	sons	of	Autolykos
415	greeted	him	with	clasping	of	hands	and	words	of	endearment,	and
Amphithea
,	his	mother's	mother,	embraced	Odysseus,	and	kissed	his	head
and	kissed	too	his	beautiful	shining	eyes.	Autolykos	gave	his	glorious
sons	the	order
to	make	ready	the	dinner,	and	they	listened	to	his	urging.
420	Presently	they	brought	in	an	ox,	a	male,	five	years	old.
They	skinned	the	victim	and	put	it	in	order,	and	butchered	the	carcass,	and
cut	the	meat	expertly	into	small	pieces,	and	spitted	the	morsels,	and	roasted
all	carefully,	and	shared	out	the	portions.
So,	for	the	whole	length	of	the	day	until	the	sun's	setting,	425	they	feasted,
nor	was	any	man's	hunger	denied	a	fair	portion;	but	when	the	sun	went
down	and	the	sacred	darkness	came	over,	then	they	went	to	their	beds	and
took	the	blessing	of	slumber.
But	when	the	young	Dawn	showed	again	with	her	rosy	fingers,
they	went	out	on	their	way	to	the	hunt,	the	dogs	and	the	people,	430	these
sons	of	Autolykos,	and	with	them	noble	Odysseus
went.	They	came	to	the	steep	mountain,	mantled	in	forest,	Parnassos,	and
soon	they	were	up	in	the	windy	folds.	At	this	time,	the	sun	had	just	begun
to	strike	on	the	plowlands,	rising	out	of	the	quiet	water	and	the	deep	stream
of	the	Ocean.
435	The	hunters	came	to	a	wooded	valley,	and	on	ahead	of	them	ran	the	dogs,
casting	about	for	the	tracks,	and	behind	them	the	sons	of	Autolykos,	and
with	them	noble	Odysseus
went	close	behind	the	hounds,	shaking	his	spear	far-shadowing.
Now	there,	inside	that	thick	of	the	bush,	was	the	lair	of	a	great	boar.
440	Neither	could	the	force	of	wet-blown	winds	penetrate	here,	nor	could	the
shining	sun	ever	strike	through	with	his	rays,	nor	yet	could	the	rain	pass
all	the	way	through	it,	so	close	together	it	grew,	with	a	fall	of	leaves
drifted	in	dense	profusion.
The	thudding	made	by	the	feet	of	men	and	dogs	came	to	him	445	as	they
closed	on	him	in	the	hunt,	and	against	them	he	from	his	woodlair	bristled
strongly	his	nape,	and	with	fire	from	his	eyes	glaring	stood	up	to	face	them
close.	The	first	of	all	was	Odysseus,	who	swept	in,	holding	high	in	his
heavy	hand	the	long	spear,	and	furious	to	stab,	but	too	quick	for	him	the
boar	drove	450	over	the	knee,	and	with	his	tusk	gashed	much	of	the	flesh,
Eurykleia	recognizes	Odysseus
tearing	sidewise,	and	did	not	reach	the	bone	of	the	man.	Now	Odysseus
stabbed	at	him,	and	hit	him	in	the	right	shoulder,	and	straight	on	through
him	passed	the	point	of	the	shining	spearhead.
He	screamed	and	dropped	in	the	dust,	and	the	life	spirit	flittered	from	him.
455	The	dear	sons	of	Autolykos	were	busy	to	tend	him,
and	understandingly	they	bound	up	the	wound	of	stately
godlike	Odysseus,	and	singing	incantations	over	it
stayed	the	black	blood,	and	soon	came	back	to	the	house	of	their	loving
father.	Then	Autolykos	and	the	sons	of	Autolykos,
460	healing	him	well	and	giving	him	shining	presents,	sent	him	speedily	back
rejoicing	to	his	own	beloved	country
in	Ithaka,	and	there	his	father	and	queenly	mother
were	glad	in	his	homecoming,	and	asked	about	all	that	had	happened,	and
how	he	came	by	his	wound,	and	he	told	well	his	story,	465	how	in	the	hunt
the	boar	with	his	white	tusk	had	wounded	him	as	he	went	up	to	Parnassos
with	the	sons	of	Autolykos.
The	old	woman,	holding	him	in	the	palms	of	her	hands,	recognized	this
scar	as	she	handled	it.	She	let	his	foot	go,	so	that	his	leg,	which	was	in	the
basin,	fell	free,	and	the	bronze	echoed.
470	The	basin	tipped	over	on	one	side,	and	the	water	spilled	out	on	the	floor.
Pain	and	joy	seized	her	at	once,	and	both	eyes	filled	with	tears,	and	the
springing	voice	was	held	within	her.
She	took	the	beard	of	Odysseus	in	her	hands	and	spoke	to	him:	‘Then,	dear
child,	you	are	really	Odysseus.	I	did	not	know	you	475	before;	not	until	I
had	touched	my	lord	all	over.’
She	spoke,	and	turned	her	eyes	toward	Penelope,	wishing
to	indicate	to	her	her	beloved	husband's	presence,
but	Penelope	was	not	able	to	look	that	way,	or	perceive	him,	since	Athene
turned	aside	her	perception.	Odysseus
480	groped	for	her,	and	took	her	by	the	throat	with	his	right	hand,	while	with
the	other	he	pulled	her	closer	to	him,	and	said	to	her:	‘Nurse,	why	are	you
trying	to	kill	me?	You	yourself	suckled	me	at	your	own	breast;	and	now	at
last	after	suffering
much,	I	have	come,	in	the	twentieth	year,	back	to	my	own	country.
485	But	now	that	you	have	learned	who	I	am,	and	the	god	put	it	into	your
mind,	hush,	let	nobody	else	in	the	palace	know	of	it.
For	so	I	tell	you	straight	out,	and	it	will	be	a	thing	accomplished.
If	you	do,	and	by	my	hands	the	god	beats	down	the	arrogant
by	his	scar,	but	is	silenced
suitors,	nurse	of	mine	though	you	are,	I	will	not	spare	you	490	when	I	kill
the	rest	of	the	serving	maids	in	my	palace.’
Then	in	turn	circumspect	Eurykleia	said	to	him:
‘My	child,	what	sort	of	word	escaped	your	teeth's	barrier?
You	know	what	strength	is	steady	in	me,	and	it	will	not	give	way	at	all,	but
I	shall	hold	as	stubborn	as	stone	or	iron.
495	And	put	away	in	your	heart	this	other	thing	that	I	tell	you.
If	by	your	hands	the	god	beats	down	the	arrogant	suitors,	then	I	will	give
you	the	list	of	those	women	who	in	your	palace	have	been	mutinous
against	you,	and	tell	you	which	are	innocent.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
500	‘Nurse,	why	should	you	tell	me	of	them?	There	is	no	need	to.
I	myself	will	properly	study	each	and	learn	of
each.	Leave	it	to	the	gods	and	keep	the	story	in	silence.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	old	woman	went	back	through	the	hall,	to	fetch
another	basin,	for	all	the	water	that	had	been	there	formerly	505	was
spilled.	When	she	had	washed	him	and	anointed	him	with	oil,	Odysseus
drew	his	chair	closer	to	the	fire,	trying
to	keep	warm,	but	hid	the	scar	under	his	ragged	clothing.
Circumspect	Penelope	then	began	their	talking:
‘Friend,	I	will	stay	here	and	talk	to	you,	just	for	a	little.
510	To	be	sure,	it	will	soon	be	the	time	for	sweet	rest,
for	one	delicious	sleep	takes	hold	of,	although	he	may	be	sorrowful.	The
divinity	gave	me	grief	beyond	measure.
The	day	times	I	indulge	in	lamentation,	mourning
as	I	look	to	my	own	tasks	and	those	of	my	maids	in	the	palace.
515	But	after	the	night	comes	and	sleep	has	taken	all	others,	I	lie	on	my	bed,
and	the	sharp	anxieties	swarming
thick	and	fast	on	my	beating	heart	torment	my	sorrowing
self.	As	when	
Pandareos
'	daughter,	the	greenwood	nightingale,	perching	in
the	deep	of	the	forest	foliage	sings	out
520	her	lovely	song,	when	springtime	has	just	begun;	she,	varying	the
manifold	strains	of	her	voice,	pours	out	the	melody,	mourning	
Itylos
,	son
of	the	lord	
Zethos
,	her	own	beloved	child,	whom	she	once	killed	with	the
bronze	when	the	madness	was	on	her;	so	my	mind	is	divided	and	starts
one	way,	then	another.
525	Shall	I	stay	here	by	my	son	and	keep	all	in	order,
my	property,	my	serving	maids,	and	my	great	high-roofed	house,
The	dream	of	the	geese
keep	faith	with	my	husband's	bed	and	regard	the	voice	of	the	people,	or	go
away	at	last	with	the	best	of	all	those	Achaians
who	court	me	here	in	the	palace,	with	endless	gifts	to	win	me?
530	My	son,	while	he	was	still	a	child	and	thoughtless,	would	not	let	me
marry	and	leave	the	house	of	my	husband;	but	now
that	he	is	grown	a	tall	man	and	come	to	maturity's	measure,	he	even	prays
me	to	go	home	out	of	the	palace,	fretting
over	the	property,	which	the	Achaian	men	are	devouring.
535	But	come,	listen	to	a	dream	of	mine	and	interpret	it	for	me.
I	have	twenty	geese	here	about	the	house,	and	they	feed	on	grains	of	wheat
from	the	water	trough.	I	love	to	watch	them.
But	a	great	eagle	with	crooked	beak	came	down	from	the	mountain,	and
broke	the	necks	of	them	all	and	killed	them.	So	the	whole	twenty	540	lay
dead	about	the	house,	but	he	soared	high	in	the	bright	air.
Then	I	began	to	weep—that	was	in	my	dream—and	cried	out
aloud,	and	around	me	gathered	the	fair-haired	Achaian	women	as	I	cried
out	sorrowing	for	my	geese	killed	by	the	eagle.
But	he	came	back	again	and	perched	on	the	jut	of	the	gabled	545	roof.	He
now	had	a	human	voice	and	spoke	aloud	to	me:
“Do	not	fear,	O	daughter	of	far-famed	Ikarios.
This	is	no	dream,	but	a	blessing	real	as	day.	You	will	see	it	done.	The	geese
are	the	suitors,	and	I,	the	eagle,	have	been	a	bird	of	portent,	but	now	I	am
your	own	husband,	come	home,	550	and	I	shall	inflict	shameless
destruction	on	all	the	suitors.”
So	he	spoke;	and	then	the	honey-sweet	sleep	released	me,	and	I	looked
about	and	saw	the	geese	in	my	palace,	feeding	on	their	grains	of	wheat
from	the	water	trough,	just	as	they	had	been.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
555	‘Lady,	it	is	impossible	to	read	this	dream	and	avoid	it	by	turning	another
way,	since	Odysseus	himself	has	told	you	its	meaning,	how	it	will	end.
The	suitors'	doom	is	evident	for	one	and	all.	Not	one	will	avoid	his	death
and	destruction.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:
560	‘My	friend,	dreams	are	things	hard	to	interpret,	hopeless	to	puzzle	out,
and	people	find	that	not	all	of	them	end	in	anything.
There	are	two	gates	through	which	the	insubstantial	dreams	issue.
One	pair	of	gates	is	made	of	horn,	and	one	of	ivory.
Those	of	the	dreams	which	issue	through	the	gate	of	sawn	ivory,	565	these
are	deceptive	dreams,	their	message	is	never	accomplished.
The	contest	of	the	bow	is	proposed
But	those	that	come	into	the	open	through	the	gates	of	the	polished	horn
accomplish	the	truth	for	any	mortal	who	sees	them.
I	do	not	think	that	this	strange	dream	that	I	had	came	to	me	through	this
gate.	My	son	and	I	would	be	glad	if	it	did	so.
570	And	put	away	in	your	heart	this	other	thing	that	I	tell	you.
This	dawn	will	be	a	day	of	evil	name,	which	will	take	me	away	from	the
house	of	Odysseus;	for	now	I	will	set	up	a	contest:	those	axes	which,	in	his
palace,	he	used	to	set	up	in	order	so	that,	twelve	in	all,	they	stood	in	a	row,
like	timbers	575	to	hold	a	ship.	He	would	stand	far	off,	and	send	a	shaft
through	them.
Now	I	will	set	these	up	as	a	contest	before	my	suitors,
and	the	one	who	takes	the	bow	in	his	hands,	strings	it	with	the	greatest
ease,	and	sends	an	arrow	clean	through	all	the	twelve	axes	shall	be	the	one
I	will	go	away	with,	forsaking	this	house	580	where	I	was	a	bride,	a	lovely
place	and	full	of	good	living.
I	think	that	even	in	my	dreams	I	shall	never	forget	it.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
‘O	respected	wife	of	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes,
do	not	put	off	this	contest	in	your	house	any	longer.
585	Before	these	people	can	handle	the	well-wrought	bow,	and	manage	to
hook	the	string	and	bend	it,	and	send	a	shaft	through	the	iron,	Odysseus	of
the	many	designs	will	be	back	here	with	you.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘If,	my	friend,	you	were	willing	to	sit	by	me	in	my	palace	590	and	entertain
me,	no	sleep	would	be	drifted	over	my	eyelids.
But	it	is	in	no	way	possible	for	people	forever
to	go	without	sleep;	and	the	immortals	have	given	to	mortals	each	his	own
due	share	all	over	the	grain-giving	corn	land.
So	I	shall	now	go	back	again	to	my	upper	chamber,
595	and	lie	on	my	bed,	which	is	made	a	sorrowful	thing	now,	always
disordered	with	the	tears	I	have	wept,	ever	since	Odysseus	went	away	to
that	evil,	not-to-be-mentioned	Ilion.
There	I	must	lie;	but	you	can	sleep	here	in	the	house,	either	bedding	down
on	the	floor,	or	they	can	make	a	bed	for	you.’
600	So	she	spoke,	and	went	back	up	to	her	shining	chamber,	not	alone,	since
others,	her	women,	went	to	attend	her.
She	went	back	to	the	upper	story	with	her	attendant
women,	and	wept	for	Odysseus,	her	beloved	husband,	until	gray-eyed
Athene	cast	sweet	slumber	over	her	eyelids.
BOOK	XX
Then	the	noble	Odysseus	bedded	down	in	the	forecourt,	and	spread
beneath	him	the	raw	hide	of	an	ox,	and	uppermost	many	fleeces	of	sheep
the	Achaians	had	dedicated.
When	he	had	lain	down,	Eurynome	threw	a	blanket	over	him.
5	There,	devising	evils	in	his	heart	for	the	suitors,
Odysseus	lay	awake;	and	out	of	the	palace	issued
those	women	who	in	the	past	had	been	going	to	bed	with	the	suitors,	full	of
cheerful	spirits	and	greeting	each	other	with	laughter.
But	the	spirit	deep	in	the	heart	of	Odysseus	was	stirred	by	this,	10	and
much	he	pondered	in	the	division	of	mind	and	spirit,	whether	to	spring	on
them	and	kill	each	one,	or	rather	to	let	them	lie	this	one	more	time	with	the
insolent	suitors,	for	the	last	and	latest	time;	but	the	heart	was	growling
within	him.
And	as	a	bitch,	facing	an	unknown	man,	stands	over
15	her	callow	puppies,	and	growls	and	rages	to	fight,	so	Odysseus'
heart	was	growling	inside	him	as	he	looked	on	these	wicked	actions.
He	struck	himself	on	the	chest	and	spoke	to	his	heart	and	scolded	it:	‘Bear
up,	my	heart.	You	have	had	worse	to	endure	before	this	on	that	day	when
the	irresistible	Cyclops	ate	up
20	my	strong	companions,	but	you	endured	it	until	intelligence	got	you	out	of
the	cave,	though	you	expected	to	perish.’
So	he	spoke,	addressing	his	own	dear	heart	within	him;
and	the	heart	in	great	obedience	endured	and	stood	it	without	complaint,
but	the	man	himself	was	twisting	and	turning.
Athene	comforts	Odysseus
25	And	as	a	man	with	a	paunch	pudding,	that	has	been	filled	with	blood	and
fat,	tosses	it	back	and	forth	over	a	blazing	fire,	and	the	pudding	itself
strains	hard	to	be	cooked	quickly;	so	he	was	twisting	and	turning	back	and
forth,	meditating	how,	though	he	was	alone	against	many,	he	could	lay
hands	on	30	the	shameless	suitors.	And	at	this	time	Athene,	descending
from	the	sky,	came	close	to	him,	and	wore	the	shape	of	a	lady.
She	came	and	stood	above	his	head,	and	spoke	a	word	to	him:	‘Why	are
you	wakeful	now,	O	most	wretched	of	all	men?
Here	is	your	house,	and	here	is	your	wife	in	the	house,	and	here	is	35	your
son;	and	he	is	the	kind	of	son	any	man	would	long	for.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
‘Yes,	O	goddess,	all	you	have	said	was	fair	and	orderly;	yet	still,	here	is
something	the	heart	inside	me	is	pondering,	how,	when	I	am	alone	against
many,	I	can	lay	hands	on	40	the	shameless	suitors.	And	they	are	always
here	in	a	body.
And	here	is	a	still	bigger	problem	that	my	heart	is	pondering.
Even	if,	by	grace	of	Zeus	and	yourself,	I	kill	them,
how	shall	I	make	my	escape?	It	is	what	I	would	have	you	think	on.’
Then	in	turn	the	goddess,	gray-eyed	Athene,	said	to	him:
45	‘Stubborn	man!	Anyone	trusts	even	a	lesser	companion
than	I,	who	is	mortal,	and	does	not	have	so	many	ideas.
But	I	am	a	god,	and	through	it	all	I	keep	watch	over	you	in	every	endeavor
of	yours.	And	now	I	tell	you	this	plainly:	even	though	there	were	fifty
battalions	of	mortal	people	50	standing	around	us,	furious	to	kill	in	the
spirit	of	battle,	even	so	you	could	drive	away	their	cattle	and	fat	sheep.
So	let	sleep	take	you	now.	There	is	annoyance	in	lying	awake	and	on	guard
all	night.	You	will	soon	be	out	of	your	troubles.’
So	she	spoke,	and	scattered	slumber	over	his	eyelids,
55	and	she,	shining	among	goddesses,	went	back	to	Olympos.
But	when	the	sleep	had	caught	him,	a	relaxing	sleep,	slipping	the	cares
from	his	mind,	at	that	time	his	virtuous	wife	wakened	in	turn,	and	cried,
sitting	up	in	her	soft	bed.	But	after	she	had	satisfied	all	her	desire	with
weeping,	then	she,	60	shining	among	women,	prayed	first	of	all	to
Artemis:
‘Artemis,	goddess	and	queen,	daughter	of	Zeus,	how	I	wish	that	with	the
cast	of	your	arrow	you	could	take	the	life	from	inside	my	heart,	this
moment,	or	that	soon	the	stormwind	would	snatch	me
Sleepless	night
away,	and	be	gone,	carrying	me	down	misty	pathways,
65	and	set	me	down	where	the	recurrent	Ocean	empties
his	stream;	as	once	the	stormwinds	carried	away	the	daughters	of
Pandareos.	The	gods	killed	their	parents,	and	they	were	left	there	orphaned
in	the	palace,	and	radiant	Aphrodite
tended	them	and	fed	them	with	cheese,	and	sweet	honey,	and	pleasant	70
wine;	and	Hera	granted	to	them,	beyond	all	women,
beauty	and	good	sense,	and	chaste	Artemis	gave	them	stature,	and	Athene
instructed	them	in	glorious	handiwork.
But	when	bright	Aphrodite	had	gone	up	to	tall	Olympos	to	request	for
these	girls	the	achievement	of	blossoming	marriage,	75	from	Zeus	who
rejoices	in	the	thunder—and	he	well	knows	all	things,	the	luck	and	the
lucklessness	of	mortal	people—	meanwhile	the	seizing	stormwinds	carried
away	these	maidens	and	gave	them	over	into	the	care	of	the	hateful	Furies.
So	I	wish	that	they	who	have	their	homes	on	Olympos
80	would	make	me	vanish,	or	sweet-haired	Artemis	strike	me,	so	that	I	could
meet	the	Odysseus	I	long	for,	even	under	the	hateful	earth,	and	not	have	to
please	the	mind	of	an	inferior	husband.	Yet	the	evil	is	endurable,	when
one
cries	through	the	days,	with	heart	constantly	troubled,	yet	still	85	is	taken
by	sleep	in	the	nights;	for	sleep	is	oblivion	of	all	things,	both	good	and
evil,	when	it	has	shrouded	the	eyelids.
But	now	the	god	has	sent	the	evil	dreams	thronging	upon	me.
For	on	this	very	night	there	was	one	who	lay	by	me,	like	him	as	he	was
when	he	went	with	the	army,	so	that	my	own	heart	90	was	happy.	I	thought
it	was	no	dream,	but	a	waking	vision.’
So	she	spoke,	and	Dawn	of	the	golden	throne	came	on	her.
Great	Odysseus	was	aware	of	her	voice	crying,
and	pondered	then,	and	it	seemed	to	him	in	his	mind	that	now	she	was
standing	by	his	head,	and	had	recognized	him	already.
95	He	rolled	together	the	blanket	and	fleece,	where	he	had	been	sleeping,	and
laid	them	down	by	the	chair	in	the	hall,	and	taking	the	oxhide	out,	laid	it
down,	and	prayed	to	Zeus,	with	his	hands	lifted:	‘Father	Zeus,	if	willingly
you	gods	led	me	over
wet	and	dry	to	my	land,	after	giving	too	much	affliction,	100	let	one	of	the
waking	people	send	me	an	omen	from	inside	the	house;	and	let	Zeus	also
show	me	an	outside	portent.’
So	he	spoke	in	prayer,	and	Zeus	of	the	counsels	heard	him.
Good	omens	in	the	morning
Immediately	he	sent	his	thunder	from	shining	Olympos
high	above	the	clouds,	and	noble	Odysseus	was	happy.
105	And	from	the	house	a	mill	woman	sent	him	an	omen.
She	was	near	by,	where	the	shepherd	of	the	host	had	set	up	his	hand	mills,
and	there	twelve	women	in	all	had	been	bending	to	grind	the	wheat	and	the
barley	flour,	men's	marrow.	The	others,	since	they	had	finished	grinding
their	wheat,	by	now	were	sleeping,	110	but	this	one	had	not	ended	her
work,	and	she	was	the	weakest.
She	stopped	the	mill	and	spoke	aloud,	a	sign	for	her	master:	‘Father	Zeus,
you	who	are	lord	of	the	gods	and	people,	now	you	have	thundered	loud
from	the	starry	sky,	although	there	is	no	cloud.	You	show	this	forth,	a
portent	for	someone.
115	Grant	now	also	for	wretched	me	this	prayer	that	I	make	you.
On	this	day	let	the	suitors	take,	for	the	last	and	latest	time,	their	desirable
feasting	in	the	halls	of	Odysseus.
For	it	is	they	who	have	broken	my	knees	with	heart-sore	labor	as	I	grind
the	meal	for	them.	Let	this	be	their	final	feasting.’
120	So	she	spoke,	and	great	Odysseus	welcomed	the	ominous	speech,	and	the
thunder	of	Zeus.	He	thought	he	would	punish	the	sinners.
The	other	serving	women	in	the	fine	house	of	Odysseus
had	gathered,	and	were	lighting	the	weariless	fire	on	the	fireplace.
Telemachos,	a	man	like	a	god,	rose	up	from	his	bed
125	and	put	on	his	clothes,	and	slung	a	sharp	sword	over	his	shoulder.
Underneath	his	shining	feet	he	bound	the	fair	sandals,	and	then	caught	up	a
powerful	spear,	edged	with	sharp	bronze.
He	came	and	stood	on	the	threshold	and	spoke	now	to	Eurykleia:	‘Dear
nurse,	how	have	you	treated	the	stranger-guest	in	our	house?
130	With	food	and	a	bed?	Or	has	he	been	left	to	lie	uncared-for?
That	is	the	way	my	mother	is,	though	she	is	sensible.
Impulsively	she	favors	the	wrong	man,	the	worse	one
among	mortals,	and	lets	the	better	man	go,	unfavored.’
Then	in	turn	circumspect	Eurykleia	said	to	him:
135	‘Child,	do	not	find	fault	with	her	this	time.	She	is	blameless.
For	he	sat	here	and	drank	his	wine,	as	he	himself	wanted,	but	he	said	he
had	no	more	hunger	for	food.	She	asked	him.
But	afterward,	when	he	was	thinking	of	rest	and	sleep,	then	she	did	tell	the
serving	women	to	make	up	his	bedding,	140	but	it	was	he,	as	one	forever
wretched	and	without
fortune,	who	would	not	sleep	in	a	bed,	nor	under	blankets,
Preparations	for	festival
but	in	the	raw	hide	of	an	ox	and	under	fleeces
he	slept	in	the	forecourt,	and	we	put	a	blanket	over	him.’
So	she	spoke,	and	Telemachos	went	out	through	the	palace,
145	holding	his	spear,	and	a	pair	of	light-footed	dogs	went	with	him.
He	went	off	to	the	assembly	to	join	the	strong-greaved	Achaians.
But	Eurykleia,	shining	among	women,	the	daughter
of	Ops,	the	son	of	Peisenor,	gave	orders	to	the	maidservants:	‘To	work.
Some	of	you	keep	busy	sweeping	the	palace,
150	and	freshen	the	floor	with	water,	and	lay	the	purple	coverlets	over	the
well-wrought	chairs.	Some	others,	wash	all	the	tables	thoroughly	clear
with	sponges,	and	clean	the	wine	bowls,	also	the	wrought	and	double-
handled	drinking-cups;	others,	be	off	now	to	the	spring	to	fetch	the	water,
and	come	back	quickly.
155	For	the	suitors	will	not	long	be	away	from	the	palace,	but	will	arrive	very
early,	since	this	is	a	public	festival.’
So	she	spoke,	and	they	listened	well	to	her,	and	obeyed	her,
and	twenty	of	them	went	on	their	way	to	the	spring	of	dark	water,	while
others,	remaining	in	the	house,	did	their	work	expertly.
160	Then	the	haughty	menservants	came	in,	and	these	presently	split	the
firewood	well	and	expertly,	and	now	the	women	came	back	from	the
spring,	and	next	after	them	came	in	the	swineherd	driving	in	three	porkers,
which	were	the	best	in	his	keeping.
These	he	left	to	graze	inside	the	handsome	enclosure,	165	while	he	himself
spoke	to	Odysseus	in	words	of	endearment:	‘Friend,	have	the	Achaians
been	giving	you	more	regard,	or	do	they	slight	you	still	in	the	halls,	as	they
did	earlier?’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘How	I	wish,	Eumaios,	the	gods	would	punish	the	outrage	170	these	men
do	in	the	violence	of	their	reckless	designs,	here	in	the	house	of	another
man.	They	have	no	gift	of	modesty.’
Now	as	these	two	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,
Melanthios,	who	was	the	herdsman	of	the	goats,	approached	them,	driving
the	goats	that	showed	the	best	in	all	of	his	goatflocks	175	to	be	the	suitors'
dinner.	Two	other	herdsmen	followed	him.
Melanthios	tethered	the	goats	under	the	echoing	portico,	and	he	himself
now	spoke	to	Odysseus,	in	terms	of	revilement:	‘Stranger,	are	you	still	to
be	here	in	the	house,	to	pester	the	gentlemen	with	your	begging?	Will	you
not	take	yourself	outside	180	and	elsewhere?	I	think	that	now	you	and	I
can	no	longer
Arrival	of	Philoitios	the	cowherd
part,	until	we	have	tried	our	fists.	There	is	nothing	orderly	about	your
begging.	And	other	Achaians	are	feasting	elsewhere.’
So	he	spoke.	Resourceful	Odysseus	gave	him	no	answer,
but	shook	his	head	in	silence,	deeply	devising	evils.
185	The	third	man	to	come	in	was	
Philoitios
,	leader	of	people,	driving	in	for
the	suitors	a	barren	cow,	and	fat	goats.
The	ferryman	had	brought	these	over;	they	give	conveyance	to	people
generally	besides,	whoever	comes	to	them.
Philoitios	tethered	the	beasts	well	under	the	echoing	portico,	190	then	went
himself	and	stood	close	by	the	swineherd,	and	asked	him:	‘Who	is	this
stranger,	swineherd,	newly	arrived	to	visit	this	house	of	ours?	From	what
people	does	he	claim	origin?
Where	is	his	ancestral	place	and	the	land	of	his	fathers?
Unlucky	man;	he	is	like	a	king	and	a	lord	in	appearance.
195	Yet	it	is	true;	the	homeless	men	are	those	whom	the	gods	hold	in	despite,
when	they	spin	misery	even	for	princes.’
He	spoke,	and	stood	close	by	Odysseus,	and	offered	his	right	hand,	and
spoke	to	him	aloud	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words,	saying:	‘Welcome,
father	and	stranger;	may	prosperous	days	befall	you	200	hereafter;	but	now
you	are	held	in	the	grip	of	many	misfortunes.
Father	Zeus,	no	god	beside	is	more	baleful	than	you	are.
You	have	no	pity	on	men,	once	you	yourself	have	created	them;	you	bring
them	into	misfortune	and	dismal	sufferings.
It	has	come	home	to	me,	when	I	saw	it.	My	eyes	are	tearful	205	as	I
remember	Odysseus,	since	I	think	he	too	is	wearing	such	rags	upon	him	as
this,	and	wandering	among	peoples	if	he	is	alive	at	all	anywhere,	and	looks
on	the	sunlight.
But	if	he	is	now	dead	and	gone	to	the	house	of	Hades,	I	mourn	then	for
blameless	Odysseus,	who	when	I	was	little	210	set	me	in	charge	of	his
oxen	in	the	
Kephallenian
	country.
Now	these	cattle	are	marvelously	grown,	nor	could	one	better	gather	an
increase	of	broad-faced	cattle	than	as	these	are	bred.	But	other	men	tell	me
to	drive	them	to	them	to	eat,	and	they	care	nothing	about	the	son	in	the
palace,	215	nor	tremble	before	the	gods'	regard;	now	they	are	grown	eager
to	divide	the	possessions	of	the	master,	who	has	been	absent	long.	But	here
is	a	problem	that	the	heart	deep	within	me	has	long	resolved.	While	the	son
is	here,	it	would	be	cowardly	to	take	my	cattle	with	me	and	go	to	another
district
Philoitios	found	to	be	loyal
220	and	alien	men;	and	yet	again	it	grows	worse	to	stay	here,	as	one	set	in
charge	of	other	men's	cattle,	and	suffer	hardships.
And	long	ago	I	would	have	escaped	from	here,	and	gone	to	some	other
powerful	king,	since	this	is	no	longer	endurable;	yet	still	I	think	of	that
luckless	man,	how	he	may	come	back	225	and	all	throughout	the	house
may	cause	the	suitors	to	scatter.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Oxherd,	since	you	seem	like	neither	a	bad	nor	a	senseless	man—and	I
myself	know	what	good	sense	is	in	you—	so	I	will	tell	you	this,	and	swear
a	great	oath	upon	it.
230	Zeus	be	my	witness,	first	of	the	gods,	and	the	table	of	friendship,	and	the
hearth	of	blameless	Odysseus,	to	which	I	come	as	a	suppliant;	Odysseus
will	come	home	again,	while	you	are	still	here	in	the	house,	and	with	your
own	eyes,	if	you	desire	to,	you	can	watch	him	killing	the	suitors,	who	are
supreme	here.’
235	Then	the	herdsman	of	oxen	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:	‘How	I	wish,
my	friend,	that	the	son	of	Kronos	would	make	good	your	saying;	then	you
would	see	what	kind	of	strength	my	hands	have.’
So	Eumaios	also	prayed	to	all	the	divinities
that	they	would	grant	the	homecoming	of	thoughtful	Odysseus.
240	Now	as	these	men	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,	the	suitors	were
compacting	their	plan	of	death	and	destruction	for	Telemachos,	and	a	bird
flew	over	them	on	the	left	side.
This	was	a	high-flown	eagle,	and	carried	a	tremulous	pigeon.
Now	it	was	Amphinomos	who	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them:	245	‘O
friends,	this	plan	of	ours	to	murder	Telemachos	will	not	ever	be	brought	to
completion;	so	let	us	think	of	our	feasting.’
So	Amphinomos	spoke,	and	his	word	was	acceptable	to	them.
They,	when	they	had	entered	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus,	laid	their
mantles	down	along	the	chairs	and	the	benches,	250	and	set	about
sacrificing	great-sized	sheep,	and	fat	goats,	and	sacrificing	an	ox	of	the
herd,	and	fattened	porkers.
They	roasted	the	vitals	and	distributed	them,	and	they	blended	the	wine	in
the	mixing	bowls,	and	the	swineherd	passed	the	wine	cups	about,	and
Philoitios,	leader	of	men,	served	them	the	bread	255	in	beautiful	baskets,
and	Melanthios	poured	the	wine	for	them.
They	put	forth	their	hands	to	the	good	things	that	lay	ready	before	them.
Telemachos,	his	heart	full	of	guile,	seated	Odysseus
inside	the	well-constructed	hall,	and	by	the	stone	threshold,
Arrival	of	the	suitors
setting	down	a	poor	chair	for	him,	and	a	little	table,	260	and	set	before	him
a	portion	of	vitals,	and	poured	wine	for	him:	in	a	golden	drinking	cup,	and
then	he	spoke	a	word	to	him:	‘Take	your	place	here	and	drink	your	wine	in
the	men's	company.
I	myself	will	defend	you	against	the	blows	and	the	insults	of	all	the	suitors.
This	house	does	not	belong	to	the	people,	265	but	it	belongs	to	Odysseus;
he	acquired	it;	this	makes	it	mine;	and	so,	you	suitors,	hold	back	your	spirit
for	insults	and	blows,	or	else	there	may	be	a	quarrel	and	fight	between	us.’
So	he	spoke,	and	all	of	them	bit	their	lips	in	amazement
at	Telemachos,	and	the	daring	way	he	had	spoken	to	them.
270	Now	Antinoös,	the	son	of	Eupeithes,	said	to	them:
‘We	Achaians	must	accept	the	word	of	Telemachos,
though	it	is	hard.	Now	he	threatens	us	very	strongly.
Zeus,	son	of	Kronos,	stopped	us;	otherwise	we	should	before	now	have	put
him	down	in	his	halls,	though	he	is	a	lucid	speaker.’
275	So	spoke	Antinoös,	but	the	other	paid	no	attention.	The	heralds	came
through	the	town	driving	the	holy	hecatomb	of	the	gods,	and	the	flowing-
haired	Achaians	assembled	under	the	shady	grove	of	him	who	strikes	from
afar,	Apollo.
When	they	had	roasted	and	taken	off	the	spits	the	outer
280	meats,	dividing	shares	they	held	their	communal	high	feast.
Then	they	who	were	working	set	down	before	Odysseus	an	equal	portion,
such	as	they	got	themselves,	for	this	was	the	order	of	Telemachos,	beloved
son	of	godlike	Odysseus.
And	yet	Athene	would	not	altogether	permit	the	arrogant
285	suitors	to	keep	from	heart-hurting	outrage,	so	to	make	greater	the	anguish
in	the	heart	of	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes.
There	was	a	man	among	the	suitors	versed	in	villainy;	
Ktesippos
	was	his
name,	and	he	had	his	home	in	Same.
He,	in	the	confidence	of	his	amazing	possessions,
290	courted	the	wife	of	Odysseus,	who	had	been	so	long	absent.
This	man	now	spoke	forth	among	the	insolent	suitors:
‘Hear	me	now,	you	haughty	suitors,	while	I	say	something.
The	stranger	has	had	his	share	long	since,	and,	as	is	proper,	an	equal	one;
for	it	is	not	well	nor	just	to	make	light	of	295	the	guests	of	Telemachos,
who	come	to	him	in	his	palace.
Come,	let	me	too	give	him	a	guest	gift,	so	he	can	give	it	as	prize	to	the
woman	who	washes	his	feet,	or	to	some	other
Violence	of	Ktesippos
one	of	the	servants	in	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus.’
He	spoke,	and	with	his	heavy	hand	he	caught	up	an	ox	hoof
300	that	lay	by	in	the	basket,	and	threw	it.	Odysseus	avoided	this	by	an	easy
shift	of	his	head.	He	smiled	in	his	anger	a	very	sardonic	smile.	The	hoof
hit	the	wall	of	the	well-built	house,	and	Telemachos	spoke	now	and
scolded	Ktesippos:	‘Ktesippos,	it	was	the	better	for	your	heart	that	it
happened	305	so;	you	missed	the	stranger,	he	avoided	your	missile.
I	would	have	struck	you	with	my	sharp	spear	fair	in	the	middle,	and	instead
of	your	marriage	your	father	would	have	been	busy	with	your	funeral	here.
Let	none	display	any	rudeness	here	in	my	house.	I	now	notice	all	and	know
of	it,	better	310	and	worse	alike,	but	before	now	I	was	only	an	infant.
Even	so,	we	have	had	to	look	on	this	and	endure	it
all,	the	sheepflocks	being	slaughtered,	the	wine	drunk	up,	and	the	food,
since	it	is	hard	for	one	man	to	stand	off	many.
Come	then,	no	longer	do	me	harm	in	your	hostility.
315	But	if	you	are	determined	to	murder	me	with	the	sharp	bronze,	then	that
would	be	my	wish	also,	since	it	would	be	far	better	than	to	have	to	go	on
watching	forever	these	shameful	activities,	guests	being	battered	about,	or
to	see	you	rudely	mishandling	the	serving	women	all	about	the	beautiful
palace.’
320	So	he	spoke,	and	all	of	them	stayed	stricken	to	silence.	At	last	Agelaos,
son	of	
Damastor
,	spoke	forth	among	them:	‘Dear	friends,	no	man	must	be
angry,	nor	yet	with	violent	answers	attack	what	has	been	spoken	in	justice.
And	do	not	strike	the	stranger,	as	you	have	done,	nor	yet	any	other	325
serving	man	who	is	in	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus.
But,	to	Telemachos	and	his	mother,	I	offer	gentle
advice,	if	this	might	be	pleasing	to	the	hearts	of	both	of	them.
As	long	as	the	spirits	in	the	hearts	of	you	both	were	hopeful	that	Odysseus
of	the	many	designs	would	have	his	homecoming,	330	then	no	one	could
blame	you	for	waiting	for	him,	and	holding	the	suitors	off	in	the	palace,
since	that	was	the	better	way	for	you	in	case	Odysseus	did	come	home	and
return	to	his	palace.
But	now	it	has	become	evident	that	he	never	will	come	back.
Come	then;	sit	beside	your	mother	and	give	her	this	counsel,	335	to	marry
the	one	who	is	the	best	man	and	brings	the	most	numerous	gifts.	So	you
can	be	happy,	control	your	father's	inheritance,
Hysteria	of	the	suitors—prophecies	by	Theoklymenos
and	eat	and	drink,	while	she	looks	after	the	house	of	another.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘But,	by	Zeus,	Agelaos,	I	swear,	and	by	the	sufferings	340	of	my	father,
who	has	died	or	is	driven	far	from	Ithaka,	I	do	not	delay	my	mother's
marriage;	rather	I	urge	her	to	marry	the	one	she	wants,	and	I	offer	them
countless	presents.
But	I	am	ashamed	to	drive	her	unwilling	out	of	the	palace	with	a	strict
word.	May	this	not	be	the	end	god	makes	of	it.’
345	So	spoke	Telemachos.	In	the	suitors	Pallas	Athene	stirred	up
uncontrollable	laughter,	and	addled	their	thinking.
Now	they	laughed	with	jaws	that	were	no	longer	their	own.
The	meat	they	ate	was	a	mess	of	blood,	their	eyes	were	bursting	full	of
tears,	and	their	laughter	sounded	like	lamentation.
350	Godlike	Theoklymenos	now	spoke	out	among	them:
‘Poor	wretches,	what	evil	has	come	on	you?	Your	heads	and	faces	and	the
knees	underneath	you	are	shrouded	in	night	and	darkness;	a	sound	of
wailing	has	broken	out,	your	cheeks	are	covered	with	tears,	and	the	walls
bleed,	and	the	fine	supporting	pillars.
355	All	the	forecourt	is	huddled	with	ghosts,	the	yard	is	full	of	them	as	they
flock	down	to	the	underworld	and	the	darkness.	The	sun	has	perished	out
of	the	sky,	and	a	foul	mist	has	come	over.’
So	he	spoke,	and	all	of	them	laughed	happily	at	him.
Eurymachos,	son	of	Polybos,	began	speaking	among	them:	360	‘This
stranger	newly	come	from	elsewhere	has	lost	his	senses.
Come,	young	men,	and	give	him	an	escort	out	of	the	palace	to	get	to	the
marketplace,	since	everything	here	is	darkness.’
Then	in	turn	godlike	Theoklymenos	answered:
‘Eurymachos,	I	do	not	want	you	to	give	me	an	escort.
365	I	have	eyes	and	I	have	ears,	and	I	have	both	my	feet,	and	a	mind	inside
my	breast	which	is	not	without	understanding.
These	will	take	me	outside	the	house,	since	I	see	the	evil	coming	upon	you,
and	not	one	of	the	suitors	avoiding
this	will	escape;	for	in	the	house	of	godlike	Odysseus	370	you	are
outrageous	to	men,	and	all	your	designs	are	reckless.’
So	he	spoke,	and	walked	out	of	the	well-settled	palace,
and	made	his	way	to	Peiraios,	who	hospitably	received	him.
But	the	suitors	now	were	glancing	one	at	another,	trying	to	tease
Telemachos	about	his	guests,	and	laughing	over	them;	375	and	thus	would
go	the	word	of	one	of	the	arrogant	young	men:
The	suitors	tease	Telemachos
‘No	one	has	worse	luck	with	his	guests	than	you,	Telemachos.
Here,	for	one,	somebody	brought	you	in	this	vagabond
who	wants	his	food	and	his	wine,	who	does	not	know	how	to	do	any	work,
who	has	no	strength,	but	is	just	a	weight	on	the	good	land.
380	And	now	this	other	one	stood	up	and	began	to	prophesy.
If	you	would	listen	to	what	I	say,	it	would	be	far	better.
Let	us	put	these	guests	in	a	vessel	with	many	oarlocks	and	take	them	to	the
Sicilians
.	There	they	would	fetch	a	good	price.’
So	spoke	the	suitors,	but	Telemachos	paid	no	attention,
385	but	looked	across	at	his	father	silently,	always	waiting	for	the	time	when
he	would	lay	his	hands	on	the	shameless	suitors.
The	daughter	of	Ikarios,	circumspect	Penelope,
had	taken	her	beautiful	chair	and	set	it	just	outside	the	door,	and	listened	to
every	word	the	men	in	the	hall	were	saying.
390	For	these	were	laughing	aloud	as	they	prepared	a	dinner	that	was	sweet
and	staying,	for	they	had	made	a	very	big	sacrifice;	but	there	could	not	be
a	meal	that	was	more	unpleasant	than	this	one,	such	was	to	be	the	attack
that	the	powerful	man	and	the	goddess	would	make	on	them.	For	they	had
first	begun	the	wrongdoing.
BOOK	XXI
But	now	the	goddess,	gray-eyed	Athene,	put	it	in	the	mind	of	the	daughter
of	Ikarios,	circumspect	Penelope,
to	set	the	bow	before	the	suitors,	and	the	gray	iron,	in	the	house	of
Odysseus:	the	contest,	the	beginning	of	the	slaughter.
5	So	she	ascended	the	high	staircase	of	her	own	house,
and	in	her	solid	hand	took	up	the	beautiful,	brazen
and	artfully	curved	key,	with	an	ivory	handle	upon	it.
With	her	attendant	women	she	went	to	the	inmost	recess	of	the	chamber.
There	were	stored	away	the	master's	possessions.
10	Bronze	was	there,	and	gold,	and	difficulty	wrought	iron,	and	there	the
backstrung	bow	was	stored	away,	and	the	quiver	to	hold	the	arrows.	There
were	many	painful	shafts	inside	it.
These	were	gifts	from	a	friend	whom	he	met	in	Lakedaimon,	Iphitos,	son
of	Eurytos,	one	like	the	immortal
15	gods.	These	two,	in	
Messene
,	had	encountered	each	other	in	the	house	of
wise	Ortilochos,	at	the	time	when	Odysseus	went	there	on	an	errand
enjoined	by	the	whole	community.
For	men	of	Messene	had	come	in	ships	with	many	oarlocks	and	lifted	three
hundred	sheep	from	Ithaka,	also	the	herdsmen	20	with	them,	so	Odysseus
traveled	far	on	the	embassy
while	still	a	boy,	sent	by	his	father	and	the	rest	of	the	elders.
Iphitos
	was	there	in	search	of	his	horses,	twelve	mares	he	had	lost;	hard-
working	mule	colts	were	with	them,	nursing.
These	mares	presently	were	to	mean	his	doom	and	murder,
Penelope	fetches	the	bow	of	Odysseus
25	at	the	time	when	he	came	to	the	son	of	Zeus,	strong-hearted,	the	man	called
Herakles,	guilty	of	monstrous	actions,	who	killed	Iphitos	while	he	was	a
guest	in	his	household;	hard	man,	without	shame	for	the	watchful	gods,
nor	the	table	he	had	set	for	Iphitos,	his	guest;	and	when	he	had	killed	him
30	he	kept	the	strong-footed	horses	for	himself	in	his	palace.
In	search	of	his	mares,	Iphitos	met	Odysseus,	and	gave	him	the	bow,	which
once	the	great	Eurytos	had	carried,	and	left	it	afterward	to	his	son	when	he
had	died	in	his	high	house.
Odysseus	gave	him	in	turn	a	sharp	sword	and	a	strong	spear,	35	to	begin
their	considerate	friendship,	but	these	two	never	entertained	each	other;
before	that,	the	son	of	Zeus	killed	Iphitos,	son	of	Eurytos,	one	like	the
immortal
gods,	who	gave	Odysseus	the	bow.	But	Odysseus	never
took	it	with	him	when	he	went	to	war	on	the	black	ships,	40	but	always	it
was	stored	away	in	his	halls,	in	memory	of	a	dear	friend;	but	he	carried	it
at	home	in	his	country.
When	she,	shining	among	women,	had	come	to	the	chamber,
and	had	come	up	to	the	oaken	threshold,	which	the	carpenter	once	had
expertly	planed	and	drawn	it	true	to	a	chalkline,	45	and	fitted	the	door
posts	to	it	and	joined	on	the	shining	door	leaves,	first	she	quickly	set	the
fastening	free	of	the	hook,	then	she	inserted	the	key	and	knocked	the	bolt
upward,	pushing	the	key	straight	in,	and	the	door	bellowed	aloud,	as	a	bull
does,	when	he	feeds	in	his	pasture;	such	was	the	noise	the	splendid	50
doors	made,	struck	with	the	key,	and	now	they	quickly	spread	open.
Then	she	went	up	to	the	high	platform,	where	there	were	standing	chests,
and	in	these	were	stored	fragrant	pieces	of	clothing.
From	there	she	reached,	and	took	the	bow	from	its	peg,	where	it	hung,	in
its	own	case,	a	shining	thing	that	covered	it.	Thereupon	55	she	sat	down,
and	laid	the	bow	on	her	dear	knees,	while	she	took	her	lord's	bow	out	of	its
case,	all	the	while	weeping	aloud.	But	when	she	had	sated	herself	with
tears	and	crying,	she	went	on	her	way	to	the	hall	to	be	with	the	lordly
suitors,	bearing	in	her	hand	the	backstrung	bow,	and	the	quiver	60	to	hold
the	arrows,	with	many	sorrowful	shafts	inside	it.
Her	serving	women	carried	the	box	for	her,	and	there	lay	much	iron	and
bronze,	prizes	that	had	been	won	by	the	master.
When	she,	shining	among	women,	came	near	the	suitors,
and	promises	marriage	to	the	best	archer
she	stood	by	the	pillar	that	supported	the	roof	with	its	joinery,	65	holding
her	shining	veil	in	front	of	her	face,	to	shield	it,	and	a	devoted	attendant
was	stationed	on	either	side	of	her.
Now	at	once	she	spoke	and	addressed	a	word	to	the	suitors:	‘Hear	me	now,
you	haughty	suitors,	who	have	been	using	this	house	for	your	incessant
eating	and	drinking,	though	it	70	belongs	to	a	man	who	has	been	gone	for	a
long	time;	never	have	you	been	able	to	bring	any	other	saying	before	me,
but	only	your	desire	to	make	me	your	wife	and	marry	me.
But	come,	you	suitors,	since	here	is	a	prize	set	out	before	you;	for	I	shall
bring	you	the	great	bow	of	godlike	Odysseus.
75	And	the	one	who	takes	the	bow	in	his	hands,	strings	it	with	the	greatest
ease,	and	sends	an	arrow	clean	through	all	the	twelve	axes,	shall	be	the
one	I	go	away	with,	forsaking	this	house	where	I	was	a	bride,	a	lovely
place	and	full	of	good	living.
I	think	that	even	in	my	dreams	I	shall	never	forget	it.’
80	So	she	spoke,	and	told	the	noble	swineherd,	Eumaios,	to	put	the	bow	and
the	gray	iron	in	front	of	the	suitors.
Eumaios	accepted	it,	in	tears,	and	put	them	before	them,	and	the	oxherd
also	wept,	when	he	saw	the	bow	of	his	master,	but	Antinoös	scolded	the
two	of	them,	and	spoke	out	and	named	them:	85	‘You	foolish	countrymen,
who	never	think	of	tomorrow,	poor	wretches,	why	are	you	streaming	tears,
and	troubling	the	lady	now,	and	stirring	her	heart,	when	she	has	enough
already	of	sadness	her	heart	rests	on,	now	she	has	lost	a	dear	husband.
Go	and	sit	in	silence	and	eat,	or	else	take	your	crying	90	out	of	the	door
and	begone,	but	leave	the	bow	where	you	put	it,	a	prize	for	the	suitors	to
strive	for;	a	terrible	one;	I	do	not	think	that	this	well-polished	bow	can	ever
be	strung	easily.
There	is	no	man	among	the	lot	of	us	who	is	such	a	one	as	Odysseus	used	to
be.	I	myself	have	seen	him,
95	and	I	remember	well,	though	I	was	still	young	and	childish.’
So	he	spoke,	but	the	spirit	inside	his	heart	was	hopeful
that	he	would	be	able	to	string	the	bow	and	shoot	through	the	iron;	but	he
was	to	be	the	first	to	get	a	taste	of	the	arrow	from	the	hands	of	blameless
Odysseus,	to	whom	he	now	paid	no	attention	100	as	he	sat	in	Odysseus'
halls	and	encouraged	all	his	companions.
Now	the	hallowed	prince,	Telemachos,	spoke	his	word	to	them:	‘Ah,
how	Zeus,	the	son	of	Kronos,	has	made	me	witless.
Telemachos	sets	up	the	axes
My	own	beloved	mother,	though	she	is	sensible,	tells	me	that	she	will
forsake	this	house	and	go	away	with	another;	105	and	then,	in	the
witlessness	of	my	heart,	I	laugh	and	enjoy	it.
But	come,	you	suitors,	since	here	is	a	prize	set	out	before	you,	a	woman;
there	is	none	like	her	in	all	the	Achaian	country,	neither	in	sacred	Pylos	nor
Argos	nor	in	Mykene,
nor	here	in	Ithaka	itself,	nor	on	the	dark	mainland.
110	You	yourselves	also	know	this;	then	why	should	I	praise	my	mother?
But	come,	no	longer	drag	things	out	with	delays,	nor	turn	back	still	from
the	stringing	of	the	bow,	so	that	we	may	see	it.
I	myself	am	also	willing	to	attempt	the	bow.	Then,
if	I	can	put	the	string	on	it	and	shoot	through	the	iron,	115	my	queenly
mother	would	not	go	off	with	another,	and	leave	me	sorrowing	here	in	the
house;	since	I	would	still	be	found	here	as	one	now	able	to	take	up	his
father's	glorious	prizes.’
He	spoke,	and	sprang	upright,	laying	aside	from	his	shoulders	the	red
cloak,	and	from	his	shoulders	too	took	off	the	sharp	sword.
120	He	began	by	setting	up	the	axes,	digging
one	long	trench	for	them	all,	and	drawing	it	true	to	a	chalkline,	and
stamped	down	the	earth	around	them;	wonder	seized	the	onlookers	at	how
orderly	he	set	them	up.	He	never	had	seen	them	before.	He	went	then	and
tried	the	bow,	standing	on	the	threshold.
125	Three	times	he	made	it	vibrate,	straining	to	bend	it,	and	three	times	he
gave	over	the	effort,	yet	in	his	heart	was	hopeful	of	hooking	the	string	to
the	bow	and	sending	a	shaft	through	the	iron.
And	now,	pulling	the	bow	for	the	fourth	time,	he	would	have	strung	it,	but
Odysseus	stopped	him,	though	he	was	eager,	making	a	signal	130	with	his
head.	The	hallowed	prince,	Telemachos,	said	to	them:	‘Shame	on	me.	I
must	be	then	a	coward	and	weakling,
or	else	I	am	still	young,	and	my	hands	have	yet	no	confidence	to	defend
myself	against	a	man	who	has	started	a	quarrel.
Come	then,	you	who	in	your	strength	are	greater	than	I	am,	135	make	your
attempts	on	the	bow,	and	let	us	finish	the	contest.’
So	he	spoke,	and	put	the	bow	from	him,	leaning	it
on	the	ground,	and	against	the	compacted	and	polished	door	leaves,	and	in
the	same	place	leaned	the	swift	shaft	against	the	fine	handle,	and	went	back
and	sat	in	the	chair	from	which	he	had	risen.
140	Now	Antinoös	the	son	of	Eupeithes	said	to	them:
‘Take	your	turns	in	order	from	left	to	right,	my	companions
but	fails	with	the	bow
all,	beginning	from	the	place	where	the	wine	is	served	out.’
So	spoke	Antinoös,	and	his	word	was	pleasing	to	all	of	them.
Leodes
	was	the	first	to	arise:	the	son	of	
Oinops
,	145	who	was	a	diviner
among	them,	and	sat	always	in	the	corner	beside	the	fine	mixing	bowl.	To
him	alone	their	excesses	were	hateful,	and	he	disapproved	of	all	of	the
suitors.
He	was	the	first	to	take	up	the	bow	and	the	swift	arrow	now.	He	went	then
and	tried	the	bow,	standing	on	the	threshold,	150	and	could	not	string	it;
before	that	he	ruined	his	soft,	uncalloused	hands,	pulling	at	the	string,	and
now	he	spoke	to	the	suitors:	‘Friends,	I	cannot	string	this;	let	one	of	the
others	take	it.
Here	is	a	bow	such	that	it	will	sunder	many	of	the	princes	from	life	and
soul,	since	truly	it	is	far	better	to	die	155	than	go	on	living	and	fail	of	that
for	whose	sake	we	forever	keep	on	gathering	here,	all	our	days	in
expectation.
Now	a	man	may	be	hopeful	and	in	his	heart	desirous
of	marrying	Penelope,	the	wife	of	Odysseus.
But	when	the	bow	has	been	attempted,	and	all	is	made	plain,	160	then	one
must	court	some	other	fair-robed	Achaian	woman,	and	strive	to	win	her
with	gifts	of	courtship;	she	will	then	marry	the	man	she	is	fated	to	have	and
who	brings	her	the	greatest	presents.’
So	he	spoke,	and	put	the	bow	from	him,	leaning	it
on	the	ground,	and	against	the	compacted	and	polished	door	leaves,	165
and	in	the	same	place	leaned	the	swift	shaft	against	the	fine	handle,	and
went	back	and	sat	in	the	chair	from	which	he	had	risen.
But	now	Antinoös	scolded	him,	and	spoke	out	and	named	him:	‘Leodes,
what	sort	of	word	escaped	your	teeth's	barrier?
A	terrible	and	shameful	word.	I	am	outraged	to	hear	it;	170	if	this	is	to	be
such	a	bow	that	will	sunder	the	princes	from	life	and	soul,	because	you	are
unable	to	string	it.
You	were	not	such	a	one,	when	the	lady	your	mother	bore	you,	as	ever	to
be	able	to	manage	the	bow	and	the	arrows.
But	presently	the	other	lordly	suitors	will	string	it.’
175	So	he	spoke,	and	now	urged	Melanthios	the	goatherd:	‘Come	now,
Melanthios,	light	us	a	fire	inside	the	palace,	and	set	beside	it	a	great	chair
with	fleeces	upon	it,	and	bring	out	from	the	inside	stores	a	great	wheel	of
tallow,	so	that	we	young	men,	having	heated	the	bow	and	rubbed	it	180
with	fat,	can	then	attempt	to	bend	it,	and	finish	the	contest.’
The	suitors	fail
So	he	spoke,	and	Melanthios	quickly	kindled	the	weariless
fire,	and	brought	out	the	chair,	and	laid	the	fleeces	upon	it,	and	brought	out
from	the	inside	stores	a	great	wheel	of	tallow.
The	young	men	heated	the	bow	and	tried	it,	but	were	not	able	185	to	string
it.	They	were	not	nearly	strong	enough.	All	this	time	Antinoös	still	held
back,	as	did	godlike	Eurymachos,	those	lords	of	the	suitors,	out	and	away
the	best	men	among	them.
Two	men,	the	oxherd	and	the	swineherd	of	godlike	Odysseus,
went	out	of	the	house,	in	company	keeping	close	together,	190	and	great
Odysseus	himself	came	from	the	house	to	join	them.
But	after	they	were	out	of	the	way	of	the	doors	and	the	courtyard,
Odysseus	spoke	to	the	two	of	them	in	words	of	endearment:	‘Oxherd,	and
you	too,	swineherd,	shall	I	say	something	to	you,	or	keep	it	hidden	within?
My	spirit	tells	me	to	speak	out.
195	What	sort	of	fight	would	you	put	up	in	defense	of	Odysseus,	if	he	were	to
come	suddenly,	so,	with	the	god	leading	him?
Would	you	fight	for	the	suitors,	or	would	you	fight	for	Odysseus?
Tell	me	what	your	heart	and	spirit	would	have	you	answer.’
Then	the	herdsman	of	oxen	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
200	‘Father	Zeus,	if	you	would	achieve	this	prayer	I	ask	for,	that	the	man
himself	would	come	home	with	the	divinity	guiding	him,	then	you
yourself	would	see	what	kind	of	strength	my	hands	have.’
So	Eumaios	also	prayed	to	all	the	divinities
that	they	would	grant	the	homecoming	of	thoughtful	Odysseus.
205	But	when	Odysseus	had	recognized	the	infallible	temper	of	these	men,
then	he	spoke	to	them	again	and	answered	them:	‘I	am	he.	I	am	here	in	my
house.	After	many	sufferings	I	have	come	home	in	the	twentieth	year	to
the	land	of	my	fathers.
And	now	I	see	that	of	all	my	men	it	was	only	you	two	210	who	wanted	me
to	come;	I	have	not	heard	one	of	the	others	praying	that	I	should	return
again	and	come	to	my	own	house.
Therefore	I	will	tell	you	the	truth,	and	so	it	shall	be;	if	by	my	hand	the	god
overmasters	the	lordly	suitors,	then	I	shall	get	wives	for	you	both,	and
grant	you	possessions	215	and	houses	built	next	to	mine,	and	think	of	you
in	the	future	always	as	companions	of	Telemachos,	and	his	brothers.
But	come	now,	let	me	show	you	a	proof	that	shall	be	manifest,	so	that	you
may	know	me	for	sure	and	trust	my	identity;	that	scar,	which	once	the	boar
with	his	white	tooth	inflicted
Odysseus	reveals	himself	to	Eumaios
220	on	me,	when	I	went	to	Parnassos	with	the	sons	of	Autolykos.’
So	he	spoke,	and	pushed	back	the	rags	that	covered	his	great	scar.
When	these	two	had	examined	it	and	recognized	everything,	they	burst	out
weeping	and	threw	their	arms	around	wise	Odysseus,	and	made	much	of
him,	and	kissed	him	on	his	head	and	his	shoulders,	225	and	so	Odysseus
also	kissed	their	heads	and	hands.	Now	the	sun	would	have	gone	down
while	they	were	still	thus	clamoring,	had	not	Odysseus	stayed	them	from	it
and	said	a	word	to	them:	‘Now	stop	your	lamentation	and	wailing,	or
someone	may	come	out	from	the	hall	and	see	us,	and	tell	about	it	inside.	So
rather	230	let	us	go	in	severally,	not	all	together,
I	first,	you	after	me,	but	let	us	have	this	as	a	signal	arranged;	for	all	the
others	there,	who	are	lordly	suitors,	will	not	say	that	you	can	give	me	the
bow	and	the	quiver;	but	you	must	carry	the	bow	through	the	house,	noble
Eumaios,	235	and	put	it	into	my	hands,	and	then	you	must	tell	the	women
to	bar	the	tightly	fitted	doors	that	close	the	hall;	tell	them,	if	any	of	them
hears	from	inside	the	crash	and	the	outcry,	of	men	who	are	caught	within
our	toils,	that	they	must	not	peep	in	from	outside,	but	simply	sit	still	at
their	work,	in	silence.
240	Noble	Philoitios,	your	task	is	to	make	fast	the	courtyard	door	with	the
bolt,	and	tie	the	fastening	quickly	upon	it.’
So	he	spoke,	and	went	into	the	established	palace,
and	went	back	and	sat	in	the	chair	from	which	he	had	risen,	and	after	him
the	two	thralls	of	godlike	Odysseus	entered.
245	Eurymachos	by	now	had	taken	the	bow,	and	handled	it,	turning	it	round
and	round	by	the	blaze	of	the	fire,	but	even	so	he	could	not	string	it,	and
his	proud	heart	was	harrowed.
Deeply	vexed	he	spoke	to	his	own	great-hearted	spirit:	‘Oh,	my	sorrow.
Here	is	a	grief	beyond	all	others;
250	it	is	not	so	much	the	marriage	I	grieve	for,	for	all	my	chagrin.
There	are	many	Achaian	women	besides,	some	of	them	close	by	in	seagirt
Ithaka,	and	some	in	the	rest	of	the	cities;	but	it	is	the	thought,	if	this	is	true,
that	we	come	so	far	short	of	godlike	Odysseus	in	strength,	so	that	we
cannot	even	255	string	his	bow.	A	shame	for	men	unborn	to	be	told	of.’
Then	in	turn	Antinoös,	son	of	Eupeithes,	answered:
‘It	will	not	happen	that	way,	Eurymachos.	You	yourself	know	this.
Now	there	is	a	holy	feast	in	the	community
Odysseus	asks	for	a	try	at	the	bow
for	the	god.	Who	could	string	bows	then?	Put	it	away	now	260	for	our
good	time;	but	we	shall	leave	all	the	axes	standing	where	they	are.	I	do	not
believe	anyone	will	come	in	and	steal	them	away	from	the	halls	of
Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes.
Come,	let	the	wine	steward	pour	a	round	of	wine	in	the	goblets,	so	we	can
make	a	libation	and	put	away	the	curved	bow;	265	then	at	dawn	instruct
Melanthios,	who	is	the	goatherd,	to	bring	in	goats,	those	far	the	best	in	all
of	his	goatflocks,	so	that,	dedicating	the	thighs	to	the	glorious	archer
Apollo,	we	can	attempt	the	bow	and	finish	the	contest.’
So	spoke	Antinoös,	and	his	word	was	pleasing	to	all	of	them.
270	The	heralds	poured	water	over	their	hands	to	wash	with,	and	the	young
men	filled	the	mixing	bowls	with	wine	for	their	drinking,	and	passed	to
all,	after	they	had	offered	a	drink	in	the	goblets.
But	when	they	had	poured,	and	drunk,	each	as	much	as	he	wanted,
resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	to	them	in	crafty	intention:	275	‘Hear	me	now,
you	who	are	suitors	of	our	glorious	queen,	while	I	speak	out	what	the	heart
within	my	breast	urges.
Above	all	I	entreat	Eurymachos	and	the	godlike
Antinoös,	since	what	he	said	also	was	fair	and	orderly.
Let	the	bow	be	for	the	time,	give	it	over	to	the	divinities,	280	and
tomorrow	the	god	will	give	success	to	whomever	he	wishes;	but	come	now,
give	me	the	well-polished	bow,	so	that	among	you	I	may	try	out	my
strength	and	hands,	to	see	if	I	still	have	force	in	my	flexible	limbs	as	there
has	been	in	time	past,	or	whether	my	wandering	and	lack	of	good	care	have
ruined	me.’
285	So	he	spoke,	but	all	of	them	were	wildly	indignant,	and	feared	that	he
might	take	the	well-polished	bow	and	string	it.
Now	Antinoös	scolded	him	and	spoke	out	and	named	him:	‘Ah,	wretched
stranger,	you	have	no	sense,	not	even	a	little.
Is	it	not	enough	that	you	dine	in	peace,	among	us,	who	are	violent	290
men,	and	are	deprived	of	no	fair	portion,	but	listen	to	our	conversation	and
what	we	say?	But	there	is	no	other	vagabond	and	newcomer	who	is
allowed	to	hear	us
talk.	The	honeyed	wine	has	hurt	you,	as	it	has	distracted	others	as	well,
who	gulp	it	down	without	drinking	in	season.
295	It	was	wine	also	that	drove	the	Centaur,	famous	
Eurytion
,	distracted	in	the
palace	of	great-hearted	Peirithoös	when	he	visited	the	
Lapiths
.	His	brain
went	wild	with	drinking,
Objections	from	the	suitors
and	in	his	fury	he	did	much	harm	in	the	house	of	Peirithoös.
Grief	and	rage	then	seized	the	heroes,	they	sprang	up	and	dragged	him	300
through	the	forecourt	and	outside,	with	the	pitiless	bronze	severing	his	ears
and	nose;	and	he,	having	had	his	brains	bewildered,	knew	what	a	disaster
his	unstable	spirit	had	got	him.
Since	his	time	there	has	been	a	feud	between	men	and	Centaurs,	and	he
was	the	first	who	found	his	own	evil	in	heavy	drinking.
305	So	I	announce	great	trouble	for	you	as	well,	if	ever	you	string	this	bow;
you	will	meet	no	kind	of	courtesy	in	our	group,	but	we	shall	put	you	into	a
black	ship	and	take	you	over	to	King	Echetos,	one	who	mutilates	all	men;
there	you	will	lose	everything;	sit	and	be	quiet	310	and	drink	your	wine,
nor	quarrel	with	men	who	are	younger	than	you	are.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Antinoös,	it	is	neither	fair	nor	just	to	browbeat
any	guest	of	Telemachos	who	comes	to	visit	him.
Do	you	imagine	that	if	this	stranger,	in	the	confidence	315	of	hands	and
strength,	should	string	the	great	bow	of	Odysseus,	that	he	would	take	me
home	with	him	and	make	me	his	wife?	No,	he	himself	has	no	such	thought
in	the	heart	within	him.
Let	none	of	you	be	sorrowful	at	heart	in	his	feasting	here,	for	such	a
reason.	There	is	no	likelihood	of	it.’
320	And	now	Eurymachos,	the	son	of	Polybos,	answered:
‘Daughter	of	Ikarios,	circumspect	Penelope,
we	do	not	think	he	will	take	you	away.	That	is	not	likely.
But	we	are	ashamed	to	face	the	talk	of	the	men	and	the	women,	for	fear
some	other	Achaian,	who	is	meaner	than	we	are,	325	might	say:	“Far	baser
men	are	courting	the	wife	of	a	stately	man.	They	are	not	even	able	to	string
his	bow.	Then
another,	some	beggar	man,	came	wandering	in	from	somewhere,	and	easily
strung	the	bow,	and	sent	a	shaft	through	the	iron.”
So	they	will	speak;	and	that	would	be	a	disgrace	on	all	of	us.’
330	Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Eurymachos,	there	can	be	no	glory	among	our	people
in	any	case,	for	those	who	eat	away	and	dishonor
the	house	of	a	great	man.	Why	be	concerned	over	reproaches?
But	this	stranger	is	a	very	big	man,	and	he	is	built	strongly,	335	and	also	he
claims	to	be	the	son	of	a	noble	father.
Penelope	sent	away
Come	then,	give	him	the	polished	bow.	Let	us	see	what	happens.
For	I	tell	you	this	straight	out,	and	it	will	be	a	thing	accomplished.
If	he	can	string	the	bow,	and	Apollo	gives	him	that	glory,	I	will	give	him
fine	clothing	to	wear,	a	mantle	and	tunic,	340	and	give	him	a	sharp	javelin,
to	keep	men	and	dogs	off,	and	give	him	sandals	for	his	feet,	a	sword	with
two	edges,	and	send	him	wherever	his	heart	and	spirit	desire	to	be	sent.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘My	mother,	no	Achaian	man	has	more	authority
345	over	this	bow	than	I,	to	give	or	withhold,	at	my	pleasure;	not	one	of	those
who	are	lords	here	in	rocky	Ithaka,	not	one	of	those	in	the	islands	off
horse-pasturing	Elis;	no	one	can	force	me	against	my	will;	if	I	want,	I	can
give	it	to	the	stranger	as	an	outright	gift,	to	take	away	with	him.
350	Go	therefore	back	into	the	house,	and	take	up	your	own	work,	the	loom
and	the	distaff,	and	see	to	it	that	your	handmaidens	ply	their	work	also.
The	men	shall	have	the	bow	in	their	keeping,	all	men,	but	I	most	of	all.
For	mine	is	the	power	in	this	household.’
Penelope	went	back	inside	the	house,	in	amazement,
355	for	she	laid	the	serious	words	of	her	son	deep	away	in	her	spirit;	and	she
went	back	to	the	upper	story	with	her	attendant	women,	and	wept	for
Odysseus,	her	beloved	husband,	until	gray-eyed	Athene	cast	sweet
slumber	over	her	eyelids.
Now	the	noble	swineherd	took	the	curved	bow	and	carried	it;
360	but	all	the	suitors	in	the	palace	cried	out	against	him,	and	thus	would	go
the	word	of	one	of	these	arrogant	young	men:	‘Where	are	you	carrying	the
bow,	you	sorry	and	shiftless	swineherd?	Those	swift	dogs	that	you	raised
yourself	will	feed	on	you	beside	your	pigs,	forsaken	by	men,	if	only
Apollo
365	and	the	rest	of	the	immortal	gods	are	propitious	toward	us.’
They	spoke,	and	he	took	the	bow	and	put	it	back	where	it	had	been,	in
fear,	since	many	men	were	shouting	at	him	in	the	palace,	but	from	the	other
side	Telemachos	spoke	and	threatened	him:	‘Keep	on	with	the	bow,	old
fellow.	You	cannot	do	what	everyone	370	tells	you.	Take	care,	or,	younger
though	I	am,	I	might	chase	you	out	to	the	fields	with	a	shower	of	stones.	I
am	stronger	than	you	are.
I	only	wish	I	were	as	much	stronger,	and	more	of	a	fighter	with	my	hands,
than	all	these	suitors	who	are	here	in	my	household.
So	I	could	hatefully	speed	any	man	of	them	on	his	journey
Odysseus	easily	strings	the	bow
375	out	of	our	house,	where	they	are	contriving	evils	against	us.’
So	he	spoke,	and	all	the	suitors	laughed	happily	at	him,
and	all	gave	over	their	bitter	rage	against	Telemachos.
The	swineherd	took	up	the	bow	and	carried	it	through	the	palace,	and	stood
beside	the	wise	Odysseus,	and	handed	it	to	him.
380	Then	he	called	aside	the	nurse	Eurykleia,	and	told	her:	‘Circumspect
Eurykleia,	Telemachos	wants	you
to	bar	the	tightly	fitted	doors	that	close	the	house;	and	then,	if	any	of	you
hear	from	inside	the	crash	and	the	outcry	of	men	who	are	caught	within	our
toils,	you	must	not	peep	in	385	from	outside,	but	simply	sit	still	at	your
work,	in	silence.’
So	he	spoke,	and	she	had	no	winged	words	for	an	answer.
Eurykleia	barred	the	doors	of	the	strong-built	great	hall.
Philoitios	sprang	to	his	feet	and	went	silently	outside	the	house,	and	then
he	closed	the	doors	of	the	well-made	courtyard.
390	Lying	beneath	the	portico	was	a	fiber	cable
for	an	oar-driven	ship;	with	that	he	made	fast	the	doors,	and	himself	went
in,	and	sat	again	on	the	chair	from	which	he	had	risen,	looking	toward
Odysseus,	who	by	now	was	handling	the	bow,	turning	it	all	up	and	down,
and	testing	it	from	one	side	and	another	395	to	see	if	worms	had	eaten	the
horn	in	the	master's	absence.
And	thus	would	one	of	them	say	as	he	looked	across	at	the	next	man:	‘This
man	is	an	admirer	of	bows,	or	one	who	steals	them.
Now	either	he	has	such	things	lying	back	away	in	his	own	house,	or	else	he
is	studying	to	make	one,	the	way	he	turns	it	400	this	way	and	that,	our
vagabond	who	is	versed	in	villainies.’
And	thus	would	speak	another	one	of	these	arrogant	young	men:	‘How
I	wish	his	share	of	good	fortune	were	of	the	same	measure	as	is	the	degree
of	his	power	ever	to	get	this	bow	strung.’
So	the	suitors	talked,	but	now	resourceful	Odysseus,
405	once	he	had	taken	up	the	great	bow	and	looked	it	all	over,	as	when	a	man,
who	well	understands	the	lyre	and	singing,	easily,	holding	it	on	either	side,
pulls	the	strongly	twisted	cord	of	sheep's	gut,	so	as	to	slip	it	over	a	new
peg,	so,	without	any	strain,	Odysseus	strung	the	great	bow.
410	Then	plucking	it	in	his	right	hand	he	tested	the	bowstring,	and	it	gave	him
back	an	excellent	sound	like	the	voice	of	a	swallow.
A	great	sorrow	fell	now	upon	the	suitors,	and	all	their	color	was	changed,
and	Zeus	showing	forth	his	portents	thundered	mightily.
Odysseus	shoots	through	the	axes
Hearing	this,	long-suffering	great	Odysseus	was	happy	415	that	the	son	of
devious-devising	Kronos	had	sent	him	a	portent.
He	chose	out	a	swift	arrow	that	lay	beside	him	uncovered	on	the	table,	but
the	others	were	still	stored	up	inside	the	hollow	quiver,	and	presently	the
Achaians	must	learn	their	nature.
Taking	the	string	and	the	head	grooves	he	drew	to	the	middle	420	grip,	and
from	the	very	chair	where	he	sat,	bending	the	bow	before	him,	let	the
arrow	fly,	nor	missed	any	axes
from	the	first	handle	on,	but	the	bronze-weighted	arrow	passed	through	all,
and	out	the	other	end.	He	spoke	to	Telemachos:
‘Telemachos,	your	guest	that	sits	in	your	halls	does	not	then	425	fail	you;	I
missed	no	part	of	the	mark,	nor	have	I	made	much	work	of	stringing	the
bow;	the	strength	is	still	sound	within	me,	and	not	as	the	suitors	said	in
their	scorn,	making	little	of	me.
Now	is	the	time	for	their	dinner	to	be	served	the	Achaians	in	the	daylight,
then	follow	with	other	entertainment,	430	the	dance	and	the	lyre;	for	these
things	come	at	the	end	of	the	feasting.’
He	spoke,	and	nodded	to	him	with	his	brows,	and	Telemachos,
dear	son	of	godlike	Odysseus,	put	his	sharp	sword	about	him	and	closed
his	own	hand	over	his	spear,	and	took	his	position	close	beside	him	and
next	the	chair,	all	armed	in	bright	bronze.
BOOK	XXII
Now	resourceful	Odysseus	stripped	his	rags	from	him,	and	sprang	up	atop
the	great	threshold,	holding	his	bow	and	the	quiver
filled	with	arrows,	and	scattered	out	the	swift	shafts	before	him	on	the
ground	next	his	feet,	and	spoke	his	word	to	the	suitors:	5	‘Here	is	a	task
that	has	been	achieved,	without	any	deception.
Now	I	shall	shoot	at	another	mark,	one	that	no	man	yet
has	struck,	if	I	can	hit	it	and	Apollo	grants	me	the	glory.’
He	spoke,	and	steered	a	bitter	arrow	against	Antinoös.
He	was	on	the	point	of	lifting	up	a	fine	two-handled
10	goblet	of	gold,	and	had	it	in	his	hands,	and	was	moving	it
so	as	to	drink	of	the	wine,	and	in	his	heart	there	was	no	thought	of	death.
For	who	would	think	that	one	man,	alone	in	a	company	of	many	men	at
their	feasting,	though	he	were	a	very	strong	one,	would	ever	inflict	death
upon	him	and	dark	doom?	But	Odysseus,	15	aiming	at	this	man,	struck	him
in	the	throat	with	an	arrow,
and	clean	through	the	soft	part	of	the	neck	the	point	was	driven.
He	slumped	away	to	one	side,	and	out	of	his	stricken	hand	fell	the	goblet,
and	up	and	through	his	nostrils	there	burst	a	thick	jet	of	mortal	blood,	and
with	a	thrust	of	his	foot	he	kicked	back	20	the	table	from	him,	so	that	all
the	good	food	was	scattered
on	the	ground,	bread	and	baked	meats	together;	but	all	the	suitors	clamored
about	the	house	when	they	saw	that	the	man	was	fallen,	sprang	up	from
their	seats	and	ranged	about	the	room,	throwing	their	glances	every	way	all
along	the	well-built	walls,
Odysseus	reveals	himself
25	but	there	was	never	a	shield	there	nor	any	strong	spear	for	them.
But	they	scolded	Odysseus	in	words	full	of	anger,	saying:
‘Stranger,	it	is	badly	done	to	hit	men.	You	will	never
achieve	any	more	trials.	Now	your	sudden	destruction	is	certain,	for	now
you	have	struck	down	the	man	who	was	far	the	greatest	30	of	the	youth	of
Ithaka.	For	that	the	vultures	shall	eat	you.’
Each	spoke	at	random,	for	they	thought	he	had	not	intended
to	kill	the	man,	poor	fools,	and	they	had	not	yet	realized
how	over	all	of	them	the	terms	of	death	were	now	hanging.
But	looking	darkly	upon	them	resourceful	Odysseus	answered:
35	‘You	dogs,	you	never	thought	that	I	would	any	more	come	back	from	the
land	of	Troy,	and	because	of	that	you	despoiled	my	household,	and
forcibly	took	my	serving	women	to	sleep	beside	you,
and	sought	to	win	my	wife	while	I	was	still	alive,	fearing
neither	the	immortal	gods	who	hold	the	wide	heaven,
40	nor	any	resentment	sprung	from	men	to	be	yours	in	the	future.
Now	upon	all	of	you	the	terms	of	destruction	are	fastened.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	green	fear	took	hold	of	all	of	them,
and	each	man	looked	about	him	for	a	way	to	escape	sheer	death.
Only	Eurymachos	spoke	up	and	gave	him	an	answer:
45	‘If	in	truth	you	are	Odysseus	of	Ithaka,	come	home,
what	you	have	said	is	fair	about	all	the	wickedness	done	you	by	the
Achaians,	much	in	your	house	and	much	in	the	country.
But	now	the	man	is	down	who	was	responsible	for	all
this,	Antinoös.	It	was	he	who	pushed	this	action,
50	not	so	much	that	he	wanted	the	marriage,	or	cared	for	it,
but	with	other	things	in	mind,	which	the	son	of	Kronos	would	not	grant
him:	to	lie	in	wait	for	your	son	and	kill	him,	and	then	be	king	himself	in	the
district	of	strong-founded	Ithaka.
Now	he	has	perished	by	his	own	fate.	Then	spare	your	own
55	people,	and	afterward	we	will	make	public	reparation
for	all	that	has	been	eaten	and	drunk	in	your	halls,	setting	each	upon
himself	an	assessment	of	twenty	oxen.
We	will	pay	it	back	in	bronze	and	gold	to	you,	until	your	heart	is	softened.
Till	then,	we	cannot	blame	you	for	being	angry.’
60	Then	looking	darkly	at	him	resourceful	Odysseus	answered:	‘Eurymachos,
if	you	gave	me	all	your	father's	possessions,	all	that	you	have	now,	and
what	you	could	add	from	elsewhere,	even	so,	I	would	not	stay	my	hands
from	the	slaughter,
The	battle	begins
until	I	had	taken	revenge	for	all	the	suitors'	transgression.
65	Now	the	choice	has	been	set	before	you,	either	to	fight	me
or	run,	if	any	of	you	can	escape	death	and	its	spirits.
But	I	think	not	one	man	will	escape	from	sheer	destruction.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	others'	knees,	and	the	heart	within	them,
went	slack,	but	Eurymachos	cried	a	second	time,	to	the	suitors:	70	‘Dear
friends,	now	this	man	will	not	restrain	his	invincible	hands,	but	since	he
has	got	the	polished	bow	and	the	quiver,	he	will	shoot	at	us	from	the
smooth	threshold,	until	he	has	killed	us	one	and	all.	Then	let	us	all
remember	our	warcraft.
Draw	your	swords	and	hold	the	table	before	you,	to	ward	off
75	the	arrows	of	sudden	death;	let	us	all	make	a	rush	against	him	together,	and
try	to	push	him	back	from	the	doors	and	the	threshold,	and	go	through	the
town.	So	the	hue	and	cry	could	be	most	quickly	raised,	and	perhaps	this
man	will	now	have	shot	for	the	last	time.’
So	he	spoke	aloud,	and	drew	from	his	side	the	sharp	sword,
80	brazen,	and	edged	on	either	side,	and	made	a	rush	at	him,
crying	his	terrible	cry.	At	the	same	time,	noble	Odysseus
shot	an	arrow,	and	struck	him	in	the	chest,	by	the	nipple,
and	the	speeding	arrow	fixed	in	his	liver,	and	his	sword	tumbled	out	of	his
hand	on	the	floor,	as	he,	sprawling	over	the	table,	85	doubled	and	fell,	and
on	the	floor	the	good	food	was	scattered,	and	the	two-handled	goblet.	He
struck	the	ground	with	his	forehead	in	his	paroxysm	of	pain,	and	kicking
with	both	feet
rattled	the	chair,	and	over	his	eyes	the	death	mist	drifted.
Amphinomos,	springing	forward	to	face	glorious	Odysseus,
90	made	a	rush	against	him,	and	drew	his	sharp	sword,	thinking
he	might	be	forced	to	give	way	from	the	doors;	but	now	Telemachos	was
too	quick	with	a	cast	of	the	brazen	spear	from	behind	him	between	the
shoulders,	and	drove	it	through	to	the	chest	beyond	it.
He	fell,	thunderously,	and	took	the	earth	full	on	his	forehead.
95	Telemachos	sprang	away,	and	left	behind	the	far-shadowing
spear	where	it	was	in	Amphinomos,	turning	back,	for	fear
that	as	he	pulled	out	the	far-shadowing	spear,	some	other	Achaian	might
drive	at	him	in	an	outrush,	or	else	strike	him	from	close	up.
He	went	on	the	run,	and	very	soon	he	reached	his	dear	father,	100	and
stood	there	close	beside	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words:	‘Father,
now	I	will	go	and	bring	you	a	shield,	and	two	spears,	and	a	helmet	all	of
bronze	fitting	close	to	your	temples.
The	battle	continues
I	too	will	go	and	put	on	armor,	and	give	the	swineherd
and	oxherd	more	to	wear.	It	is	better	for	us	to	be	armored.’
105	Then	in	turn	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	to	him	in	answer:	‘Run	and	fetch
them,	while	I	have	arrows	still	to	defend	me,	or	else,	while	I	am	alone,
they	might	force	me	from	the	doorway.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Telemachos	obeyed	his	dear	father,
and	went	on	his	way	to	the	inner	room,	where	glorious	armor
110	was	stored	away,	and	took	from	inside	four	shields,	and	eight	spears,	and
four	helmets	plated	with	bronze	and	crested	with	horsehair,	and	carried
them	back,	and	very	soon	he	reached	his	dear	father.
He	was	the	first	of	all	to	put	the	bronze	armor	upon	him,
and	in	the	same	way	the	two	serving	men	put	on	their	magnificent	115
arms,	and	stood	beside	the	wise,	resourceful	Odysseus.
Odysseus,	while	he	still	had	arrows	left	to	defend	him,
kept	aiming	at	the	suitors	in	his	house;	and	every
time	he	hit	his	man,	and	they	dropped	one	after	another.
But	when	there	were	no	more	arrows	left	for	the	king's	archery,	120	he	set
the	bow	so	it	leaned	against	a	pillar	sustaining
the	strong-built	palace,	there	by	the	shining	walls,	then	himself	threw
across	his	shoulders	the	shield	of	the	fourfold	oxhide.
Over	his	mighty	head	he	set	the	well-fashioned	helmet,
with	the	horsehair	crest,	and	the	plumes	nodded	terribly	above	it.
125	Then	he	caught	up	two	powerful	spears	edged	with	the	bright	bronze.
There	was	a	side	door	in	the	strongly-constructed	wall,	and	also,
next	the	edge	of	the	threshold	into	the	well-made	palace,
a	way	through	the	alley,	with	the	door	leaves	fitting	it	closely.
Odysseus	told	the	noble	swineherd	to	take	a	position
130	near	this,	and	watch	it.	Only	one	at	a	time	could	attack	there.
Agelaos	cried	aloud	to	all	of	the	suitors:
‘Dear	friends,	could	not	one	man	slip	away,	through	the	side	door,	and	tell
the	people?	So	the	hue	and	cry	could	be	most	quickly	raised,	and	perhaps
this	man	will	now	have	shot	for	the	last	time.’
135	Then	in	turn	Melanthios	the	goatherd	answered	him:	‘It	cannot	be,
illustrious	Agelaos.	The	fine	doors	to	the	court	are	terribly	close,	the
mouth	of	the	alley	is	difficult	to	force;	one	man	could	hold	against	all,	if
he	were	a	fighter.
Come	rather,	let	me	bring	you	arms	from	inside	the	chamber
140	to	arm	you	in;	for	there,	I	believe,	and	in	no	other
place,	Odysseus	and	his	glorious	son	have	hidden	them.’
Melanthios	brings	arms	to	the	suitors
So	Melanthios	the	goatherd	spoke,	and	climbed	through
to	Odysseus'	inner	chambers	by	the	vents	in	the	great	hall.
From	there	he	took	out	a	dozen	heavy	shields,	and	as	many
145	spears,	and	as	many	brazen	helmets	crested	with	horsehair,
and	went	on	his	way,	and	quickly	handed	them	to	the	suitors.
Then	the	knees	of	Odysseus	went	slack,	and	the	heart	within	him,	as	he
saw	them	putting	the	armor	about	them,	and	shaking
the	long	spears	in	their	hands;	he	thought	it	was	monstrous
150	treason,	and	he	spoke	now	in	winged	words	to	Telemachos:
‘Telemachos,	some	one	of	the	women	here	in	the	palace,
or	Melanthios,	has	made	an	evil	attack	upon	us.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘Father,	it	was	my	own	mistake,	and	there	is	no	other
155	to	blame.	I	left	the	door	of	the	chamber,	which	can	close	tightly,	open	at
an	angle.	One	of	these	men	was	a	better	observer
than	I.	Go	now,	noble	Eumaios,	and	close	the	chamber
door,	and	see	if	it	is	one	of	the	women	doing	this,
or	Melanthios,	son	of	Dolios,	which	is	what	I	think.’
160	Now	as	these	two	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,	Melanthios	the
goatherd	went	back	into	the	chamber	to	bring	more	splendid	armor,	but
the	noble	swineherd	sighted	him.
Quickly	he	spoke	a	word	to	Odysseus	standing	close	by	him:
‘Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
165	there	is	that	deadly	man	again,	the	one	we	suspected,
on	his	way	into	the	chamber.	Now	give	me	your	true	instructions,	whether,
if	I	prove	stronger	than	he	is,	I	am	to	kill	him,
or	bring	him	back	here	to	you,	so	he	can	pay	for	the	many
transgressions,	all	that	he	has	devised	in	your	house	against	you.’
170	Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:	‘Telemachos
and	I	will	hold	off	the	haughty	suitors,	for	all	their	fury,	here	inside	the
palace;	you	two
twist	the	feet	of	Melanthios	and	his	arms	behind	him,
put	him	away	in	the	chamber	and	fasten	boards	behind	him,
175	then	make	him	secure	with	a	braided	rope,	and	hoist	him	upward	along
the	high	column,	till	you	fetch	him	up	to	the	roof	beams.
Thus,	while	he	still	stays	alive,	he	will	suffer	harsh	torment.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	listened	well	to	him	and	obeyed	him.
They	went	into	the	chamber.	He	was	there,	but	he	did	not	see	them.
180	Now,	he	was	searching	out	weapons,	deep	in	the	back	of	the	chamber,
Melanthios	tied	up
and	they	stood	there	waiting	for	him	behind	the	columns,	on	either	side,
until	Melanthios	the	herdsman	of	goats	came	over
the	sill.	In	one	hand	he	was	holding	a	splendid	helmet,
and	in	the	other	the	ancient	shield,	all	fouled	with	mildew,	185	of	the	hero
Laertes,	which	he	had	carried	when	he	was	a	young	man.
It	had	been	lying	there,	and	the	stitches	were	gone	on	the	handstraps.
Now	they	sprang	out	and	seized	him,	caught	hold	of	his	hair	and	dragged
him	in,	and	threw	him	down	on	the	floor,	there	in	his	anguish
of	heart,	and	in	the	hurtful	bond	they	securely	fastened
190	his	feet	and	arms,	twisted	all	the	way	back,	obeying	the	orders	given	by
great,	enduring	Odysseus,	the	son	of	Laertes.
Then	they	made	him	secure	with	a	braided	rope,	and	hoisted	him	high	on
the	column,	until	they	fetched	him	up	to	the	roof	beams.
Then	you	spoke	and	jeered	at	him,	O	swineherd	Eumaios:
195	‘Now	the	whole	night	long,	Melanthios,	you	shall	keep	watch	wakefully,
laid,	as	you	deserve,	to	rest	on	a	soft	bed,
well	aware	of	the	young	Dawn	throned	in	gold	as	she	rises
up	from	the	Ocean	rivers,	at	the	time	when	you	used	to	drive	in	goats	to	the
palace,	so	as	to	make	a	feast	for	the	suitors.’
200	So	they	left	him	there,	trussed	up	in	his	horrible	bindings.	The	herdsmen
closed	the	shining	door,	and	put	on	their	armor,	and	went	and	stood	beside
the	wise,	resourceful	Odysseus.
There	both	sides	stood,	breathing	valor,	the	four	men	holding	the	threshold,
but	inside	the	house	were	many	and	brave	men.
205	Now	to	these	men	came	the	daughter	of	Zeus,	Athene,
likening	herself	in	voice	and	appearance	to	Mentor.
Odysseus	was	happy	when	he	saw	her,	and	hailed	her,	saying:
‘Mentor,	help	me	from	hurt,	and	remember	me,	your	companion
and	friend,	who	have	done	you	much	good.	We	two	grew	up	together.’
210	He	spoke	so,	but	thought	it	was	Athene,	leader	of	armies.	On	the	other
side	in	the	palace	the	suitors	cried	out	against	her,	and	first	to	threaten	was
Agelaos,	son	of	Damastor;
‘Mentor,	never	let	Odysseus	by	talking	persuade	you
to	fight	against	the	suitors	and	defend	him.	Consider
215	what	we	propose	to	do,	and	I	think	it	will	be	accomplished.
When	we	kill	these	men,	the	son	and	the	father,	you	too
shall	be	killed	in	their	company,	for	what	you	are	trying
to	do	here	in	the	palace.	You	shall	pay	for	it	with	your	own	head.
Athene	helps	Odysseus	and	his	party
But	when	with	the	bronze	we	have	taken	away	the	lives	of	all	of	you,	220
all	the	possessions	which	are	yours,	both	here	and	elsewhere,	we	shall
count	in	with	those	of	Odysseus,	nor	will	we	suffer	your	sons	to	go	on
living	here	in	your	halls,	nor	your	daughters	and	loving	wife	to	go	about	in
the	town	of	Ithaka.’
He	spoke,	and	Athene	in	her	heart	grew	still	more	angry,
225	and	she	scolded	Odysseus	in	words	full	of	anger,	saying:
‘No	longer,	Odysseus,	are	the	strength	and	valor	still	steady	within	you,	as
when,	for	the	sake	of	white-armed,	illustrious	Helen,	you	fought	nine	years
with	the	Trojans,	ever	relentless;	and	many	men	you	killed	there	in	the
dreaded	encounter,
230	and	by	your	counsel	the	wide-wayed	city	of	Priam	was	taken.
How	is	it	now,	when	you	have	come	back	to	your	own	possessions	and
house,	you	complain,	instead	of	standing	up	to	the	suitors?
Come	here,	friend,	and	watch	me	at	work,	and	standing	beside	me	see	what
kind	of	man	is	Mentor	the	son	of	
Alkimos
,	235	and	how	against	your
enemies	he	repays	your	kindness.’
She	spoke,	but	did	not	yet	altogether	turn	the	victory
their	way.	She	still	was	putting	to	proof	the	strength	and	courage	alike	of
Odysseus	and	his	glorious	son;	and	she	now,
likening	herself	to	a	swallow	in	their	sight,	shot	up
240	high	aloft,	and	perched	on	a	beam	of	the	smoky	palace.
Now	Agelaos,	son	of	Damastor,	urged	on	the	suitors,
with	
Demoptolemos
,	Amphimedon,	and	Peisandros	the	son	of	Polyktor,
Eurynomos,	and	the	wise	Polybos.
For	these	in	warcraft	were	by	far	the	best	of	the	suitors
245	who	still	were	alive	and	fighting	for	their	lives;	but	others	had	already
fallen	before	the	bow	and	the	showering	arrows.
To	these	Agelaos	spoke,	directing	his	words	to	all	of	them:
‘Dear	friends,	now	this	man	will	have	to	stay	his	invincible	hands,	since
Mentor,	after	doing	some	empty	boasting,
250	has	gone,	and	these	are	left	alone	in	the	front	doorway.
Now,	do	not	all	of	you	throw	your	long	spears	at	the	same	time	at	him,	but
let	us	six	throw	first	with	our	spears,	and	it	may	be	Zeus	will	grant	that	we
strike	Odysseus	and	win	the	glory.
We	care	nothing	about	the	others,	once	this	man	has	fallen.’
255	So	he	spoke,	and	all	six	aimed	their	spears,	as	he	told	them,	and	threw,	but
Athene	made	vain	all	their	casts,	so	that	one	man	threw	his	spear	against
the	pillar	sustaining
Defeat	and	death	of	all	the	suitors
the	strong-built	palace,	another	into	the	door,	close-fitted.
One	ash	spear	heavy	with	bronze	was	driven	into	the	side	wall.
260	But	then,	after	they	had	avoided	the	spears	of	the	suitors,	much-enduring
great	Odysseus	began	speaking	to	them:
‘Dear	friends,	now	I	would	say	it	was	the	time	for	our	turn
to	throw	our	spears	into	the	midst	of	the	suitors,	furious
as	they	are	to	kill	us,	and	add	to	former	evils	committed.’
265	So	he	spoke,	and	they	all	aimed	their	sharp	spears	and	threw	them	straight
ahead.	Demoptolemos	was	killed	by	Odysseus,	
Euryades
	by	Telemachos,
Elatos
	by	the	swineherd,	Peisandros	by	Philoitios,	the	herdsman	of	oxen.
But	when	all	these	had	fallen,	and	bit	with	their	teeth	the	great	earth,	270
the	suitors	drew	away	into	the	corner	of	the	palace,
and	the	others	rushed,	and	plucked	their	spears	from	the	fallen	bodies.
Once	again	the	suitors	aimed	at	them	with	their	sharp	spears,
and	threw,	but	Athene	made	vain	most	of	their	casts,	so	that	one	man	threw
his	spear	against	the	pillar	sustaining
275	the	strong-built	palace,	another	into	the	door,	close-fitted.
One	ash	spear	heavy	with	bronze	was	driven	into	the	side	wall.
But	Amphimedon	struck	Telemachos	on	the	wrist,	with	a	glancing	blow,
and	the	bronze	ripped	the	outermost	skin;	and	also
Ktesippos	with	his	long	spear	hit	Eumaios	over
280	the	shield,	and	scratched	his	shoulder,	but	the	spear	flew	over,	and	landed
void.	Then	the	company	of	wise,	devious-devising
Odysseus	threw	their	spears	into	the	mass	of	the	suitors.
This	time	Odysseus,	stormer	of	cities,	struck	down	Eurydamas;
Telemachos	hit	Amphimedon;	the	swineherd,	Polybos.
285	Then	Philoitios,	herdsman	of	oxen,	struck	Ktesippos
full	in	the	chest,	and	spoke	a	word	of	vaunting	over	him:
‘O	son	of	
Polytherses
,	lover	of	mockery,	never	speak	loud	and	all	at
random	in	your	recklessness.	Rather
leave	all	speech	to	the	gods,	since	they	are	far	stronger	than	you	are.
290	Here	is	your	guest	gift,	in	exchange	for	that	hoof	you	formerly	gave	to
godlike	Odysseus,	as	he	went	about	through	the	palace.’
So	spoke	the	herdsman	of	horn-curved	oxen;	but	now	Odysseus
stabbed	
Agelaos
,	son	of	Damastor,	from	close,	with	the	long	spear,	while
Telemachos	stabbed	Leokritos,	son	of	Euenor,
295	in	the	midmost	belly	with	the	spear,	and	drove	the	bronze	clean	through.
End	of	the	battle
He	fell	then	headlong,	and	took	the	earth	full	on	his	forehead.
And	now	Athene	waved	the	aegis,	that	blights	humanity,
from	high	aloft	on	the	roof,	and	all	their	wits	were	bewildered;	and	they
stampeded	about	the	hall,	like	a	herd	of	cattle
300	set	upon	and	driven	wild	by	the	darting	horse	fly
in	the	spring	season,	at	the	time	when	the	days	grow	longer;	but	the	other
men,	who	were	like	hook-clawed,	beak-bent	vultures,	descending	from	the
mountains	to	pounce	upon	the	lesser	birds;	and	these	on	the	plain,
shrinking	away	from	the	clouds,	speed	off,	305	but	the	vultures	plunge	on
them	and	destroy	them,	nor	is	there	any	defense,	nor	any	escape,	and	men
are	glad	for	the	hunting;
so	these	men,	sweeping	about	the	palace,	struck	down
the	suitors,	one	man	after	another;	the	floor	was	smoking
with	blood,	and	the	horrible	cries	rose	up	as	their	heads	were	broken.
310	Leodes	rushed	in	and	caught	the	knees	of	Odysseus,	and	spoke	to	him	in
winged	words	and	in	supplication:	‘I	am	at	your	knees,	Odysseus.	Respect
me,	have	mercy;
for	I	claim	that	never	in	your	halls	did	I	say	or	do	anything	wrong	to	any
one	of	the	women,	but	always	was	trying
315	to	stop	any	one	of	the	other	suitors	who	acted	in	that	way.
But	they	would	not	listen	to	me	and	keep	their	hands	off	evil.
So	by	their	own	recklessness	they	have	found	a	shameful
death,	but	I	was	their	diviner,	and	I	did	nothing;
but	I	must	fall,	since	there	is	no	gratitude	for	past	favors.’
320	Then	looking	darkly	at	him	spoke	resourceful	Odysseus:	‘If	you	claim	to
be	the	diviner	among	these	people,	many	a	time	you	must	have	prayed	in
my	palace,	asking
that	the	completion	of	my	sweet	homecoming	be	far	off
from	me,	that	my	dear	wife	would	go	off	with	you,	and	bear	you	325
children.	So	you	cannot	escape	from	sorry	destruction.’
So	he	spoke,	and	in	his	heavy	hand	caught	up	a	sword
that	was	lying	there	on	the	ground	where	Agelaos	had	dropped	it	when	he
was	killed.	With	this	he	cut	through	the	neck	at	the	middle,	and	the	head	of
Leodes	dropped	in	the	dust	while	he	was	still	speaking.
330	Phemios	the	singer,	the	son	of	
Terpias
,	still	was	skulking	away	from
death.	He	had	been	singing	among	the	suitors	under	compulsion,	and
stood	with	the	clear-toned	lyre	in	his	hands	by	the	side	door,	and	his	heart
was	pondering	one	of	two	courses:	either	to	slip	out	of	the	hall	to	the	altar
of	mighty
The	singer	and	herald	spared
335	Zeus	of	the	court,	and	crouch	at	the	structure,	where	once	Odysseus	and
Laertes	had	burned	up	the	thighs	of	many	oxen,
or	rush	up	and	make	entreaty	at	the	knees	of	Odysseus.
Then	in	the	division	of	his	heart	this	way	seemed	best	to	him,	to	seize	hold
of	the	knees	of	Odysseus,	son	of	Laertes.
340	Thereupon	he	laid	the	hollowed	lyre	on	the	ground,
between	the	mixing	bowl	and	the	chair	with	its	nails	of	silver,	but	he
himself	rushed	in	and	caught	the	knees	of	Odysseus,
and	spoke	to	him	in	winged	words	and	in	supplication:
‘I	am	at	your	knees,	Odysseus.	Respect	me,	have	mercy.
345	You	will	be	sorry	in	time	to	come	if	you	kill	the	singer
of	songs.	I	sing	to	the	gods	and	to	human	people,	and	I	am
taught	by	myself,	but	the	god	has	inspired	in	me	the	song-ways	of	every
kind.	I	am	such	a	one	as	can	sing	before	you
as	to	a	god.	Then	do	not	be	furious	to	behead	me.
350	Telemachos	too,	your	own	dear	son,	would	tell	you,	as	I	do,	that	it	was
against	my	will,	and	with	no	desire	on	my	part,
that	I	served	the	suitors	here	in	your	house	and	sang	at	their	feasting.
They	were	too	many	and	too	strong,	and	they	forced	me	to	do	it.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	hallowed	prince	Telemachos	heard	him.
355	Quickly	then	he	spoke	to	his	father,	who	stood	close	by	him:	‘Hold	fast.
Do	not	strike	this	man	with	the	bronze.	He	is	innocent.
And	let	us	spare	Medon	our	herald,	a	man	who	has	always
taken	care	of	me	when	I	was	a	child	in	your	palace;
unless,	that	is,	Philoitios	or	the	swineherd	has	killed	him,	360	or	unless	he
came	in	your	way	as	you	stormed	through	the	palace.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Medon,	a	man	of	prudent	thoughts,	heard	him;
for	he	had	hidden	under	a	chair,	and	put	on	about	him
the	hide	of	an	ox,	freshly	skinned,	so	avoiding	black	death.
He	came	out	quickly	from	under	the	chair,	and	took	off	the	oxhide,	365	and
then	rushed	in	and	caught	hold	of	the	knees	of	Telemachos,	and	spoke	to
him	in	winged	words	and	in	supplication:
‘Here	I	am,	dear	friend.	Hold	fast,	and	speak	to	your	father,	before—since
he	is	so	strong—he	destroys	me	with	the	tearing	bronze,	in	anger	over	the
suitors,	who	kept	ruining
370	his	goods	in	his	palace	and,	like	fools,	paid	you	no	honor.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	smiled	upon	him	and	answered:
‘Do	not	fear.	Telemachos	has	saved	you	and	kept	you
alive,	so	you	may	know	in	your	heart,	and	say	to	another,
Eurykleia	summoned
that	good	dealing	is	better	by	far	than	evil	dealing.
375	But	go	out	now	from	the	palace	and	sit	outside,	away	from
the	slaughter,	in	the	courtyard,	you	and	the	versatile	singer,	so	that	I	can	do
in	the	house	the	work	that	I	have	to.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	two	went	away,	outside	the	palace,
and	sat	down	both	together	beside	the	altar	of	mighty
380	Zeus,	looking	all	about	them,	still	thinking	they	would	be	murdered.
Odysseus	looked	about	his	own	house,	to	see	if	any
man	still	was	left	alive,	escaping	the	black	destruction;
but	he	saw	them,	one	and	all	in	their	numbers,	lying	fallen
in	their	blood	and	in	the	dust,	like	fish	whom	the	fishermen	385	have	taken
in	their	net	with	many	holes,	and	dragged	out
onto	the	hollow	beach	from	the	gray	sea,	and	all	of	them
lie	piled	on	the	sand,	needing	the	restless	salt	water;
but	Helios,	the	shining	Sun,	bakes	the	life	out	of	them.
Like	these,	the	suitors	now	were	lying	piled	on	each	other.
390	Then	at	last	resourceful	Odysseus	said	to	Telemachos:
‘Telemachos,	come	now,	summon	in	the	nurse,	Eurykleia,
so	that	I	can	say	what	is	on	my	mind	to	say	to	her.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Telemachos	obeyed	his	dear	father.
He	opened	the	door	and	called	out	to	the	nurse,	Eurykleia:
395	‘Rise	and	come	here,	aged	woman,	you	who	watch	over
all	that	the	serving	women	do	here	in	our	palace.
Come	here.	My	father	calls	you.	He	has	something	to	tell	you.’
So	he	spoke,	and	she	had	no	winged	words	for	an	answer,
but	she	opened	the	doors	of	the	strong-built	great	hall,	and	went	400	on
inside,	but	Telemachos	went	ahead,	leading	her.
There	she	found	Odysseus	among	the	slaughtered	dead	men,
spattered	over	with	gore	and	battle	filth,	like	a	lion
who	has	been	feeding	on	an	ox	of	the	fields,	and	goes	off
covered	with	blood,	all	his	chest	and	his	flanks	on	either
405	side	bloody,	a	terrible	thing	to	look	in	the	face;	so
now	Odysseus'	feet	and	the	hands	above	them	were	spattered.
She,	when	she	saw	the	dead	men	and	the	endless	blood,	began	then	to	raise
the	cry	of	triumph,	having	seen	it	was	monstrous
work,	but	Odysseus	checked	her	and	held	her,	for	all	her	eagerness,	410
and	spoke	to	her	and	addressed	her	in	winged	words,	saying:	‘Keep	your
joy	in	your	heart,	old	dame;	stop,	do	not	raise	up	the	cry.	It	is	not	piety	to
glory	so	over	slain	men.
Punishment	of	the	faithless	maids
These	were	destroyed	by	the	doom	of	the	gods	and	their	own	hard	actions,
for	these	men	paid	no	attention	at	all	to	any	man	on	earth
415	who	came	their	way,	no	matter	if	he	were	base	or	noble.
So	by	their	own	recklessness	they	have	found	a	shameful
death.	Now	assemble	here	the	women	who	are	in	the	palace,
both	those	who	have	done	me	no	honor,	and	those	who	are	innocent.’
Then	the	beloved	nurse	Eurykleia	said	to	him	in	answer:
420	‘So,	my	child,	I	will	tell	you	the	whole	truth	of	the	matter.
You	have	fifty	serving	women	here	in	your	palace,
and	these	I	have	taught	to	work	at	their	own	tasks,	the	carding	of	wool,	and
how	to	endure	their	own	slavery.	Of	these
fifty,	twelve	in	all	have	taken	to	immorality.
425	They	pay	no	attention	to	me,	or	even	to	Penelope.
Telemachos	is	but	lately	come	of	age,	and	his	mother
would	not	let	him	be	in	charge	of	the	serving	women.
But	come,	let	me	go	up	to	the	shining	upper	chamber
and	tell	your	wife.	Some	god	has	sent	down	a	sleep	upon	her.’
430	Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:	‘Do	not
waken	her	yet,	but	tell	those	women	who	have	been	shameful	in	their
devisings	to	come	here	to	my	presence.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	old	woman	went	through	the	palace,
bringing	the	message	to	the	women	and	urging	them	onward.
435	But	Odysseus,	calling	Telemachos	and	the	oxherd
and	swineherd	to	him,	spoke	to	them	in	winged	words,	saying:	‘Begin	the
work	of	carrying	out	the	bodies,	and	tell
the	women	to	help,	and	after	that	to	wash	the	beautiful
chairs	and	tables	clean,	with	water	and	porous	sponges.
440	Then,	after	you	have	got	all	the	house	back	in	good	order,
lead	all	these	maidservants	out	of	the	well-built	palace
between	the	round-house	and	the	unfaulted	wall	of	the	courtyard,	and	hew
them	with	the	thin	edge	of	the	sword,	until	you	have	taken	the	lives	from
all,	and	they	forget	Aphrodite,	the	goddess
445	they	had	with	them	when	they	lay	secretly	with	the	suitors.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	women	all	in	a	huddle	came	out,
with	terrible	cries	of	sorrow,	and	the	big	tears	falling.
First	they	carried	away	the	bodies	of	all	the	dead	men,
and	laid	them	under	the	portico	of	the	well-built	courtyard,	450	stacking
them	on	each	other.	Odysseus	himself	directed	them
and	Melanthios
and	hurried	them	on.	They	carried	the	bodies	out.	They	had	to.
Then,	after	they	had	done	this,	the	women	washed	the	beautiful	chairs	and
tables	clean,	with	water	and	porous	sponges.
After	this	Telemachos,	the	oxherd	and	the	swineherd,
455	scraped	out	the	floor	of	the	strongly	constructed	house,	with	shovels,	and
the	women	carried	the	scrapings	way,	and	piled	them	outside.
But	after	they	had	got	all	the	house	back	in	good	order,
leading	the	maidservants	out	of	the	well-built	palace,
between	the	round-house	and	the	unfaulted	wall	of	the	courtyard,	460	they
penned	them	in	a	strait	place	from	which	there	was	no	escaping.
Now	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	began	speaking	among	them:
‘I	would	not	take	away	the	lives	of	these	creatures	by	any
clean	death,	for	they	have	showered	abuse	on	the	head	of	my	mother,	and
on	my	own	head	too,	and	they	have	slept	with	the	suitors.’
465	So	he	spoke,	and	taking	the	cable	of	a	dark-prowed	ship,	fastened	it	to	the
tall	pillar,	and	fetched	it	about	the	round-house;	and	like	thrushes,	who
spread	their	wings,	or	pigeons,	who	have	flown	into	a	snare	set	up	for
them	in	a	thicket,	trying
to	find	a	resting	place,	but	the	sleep	given	them	was	hateful;	470	so	their
heads	were	all	in	a	line,	and	each	had	her	neck	caught	fast	in	a	noose,	so
that	their	death	would	be	most	pitiful.
They	struggled	with	their	feet	for	a	little,	not	for	very	long.
They	took	Melanthios	along	the	porch	and	the	courtyard.
They	cut	off,	with	the	pitiless	bronze,	his	nose	and	his	ears,	475	tore	off	his
private	parts	and	gave	them	to	the	dogs	to	feed	on	raw,	and	lopped	off	his
hands	and	feet,	in	fury	of	anger.
Then,	after	they	had	washed	their	own	hands	and	feet	clean,
they	went	into	the	house	of	Odysseus.	Their	work	was	ended.
But	Odysseus	said	to	the	beloved	nurse,	Eurykleia:
480	‘Bring	me	brimstone,	old	dame,	the	cure	of	evils,	and	bring	me	fire,	so	I
can	sulphur	the	hall,	and	tell	Penelope
to	come	here	now,	together	with	her	attendant	women,
and	tell	all	the	serving	maids	to	come	here	to	the	palace.’
485	Then	the	beloved	nurse	Eurykleia	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘All	this	you
have	said,	my	child,	was	fair	and	orderly.
But	come	now,	let	me	bring	you	out	a	mantle	and	tunic,
and	do	not	stand	thus	here	in	the	hall,	with	your	broad	shoulders	covered
over	with	rags	as	they	are.	That	would	be	scandalous.’
490	Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	her:
Odysseus	cleans	the	palace
‘Before	all	this,	let	me	have	the	fire	in	my	palace.’
He	spoke,	and	the	dear	nurse	Eurykleia	did	not	disobey	him.	She
brought	him	out	the	fire	and	brimstone;	and	then	Odysseus	cleaned	his
palace,	house	and	courtyard	alike,	with	sulphur.
495	The	old	woman	went	off	through	the	fine	house	of	Odysseus,	to	take	the
message	to	the	women	and	tell	them	to	gather.
They	came	from	the	main	house,	and	in	their	hands	held	torches,	and	all
the	serving	women	clung	to	Odysseus,	and	greeted	him,	and	made	much	of
him,	and	kissed	him	on	his	head	and	his	shoulders	500	and	hands,	admiring
him,	and	sweet	longing	for	lamentation
and	tears	took	hold	of	him.	He	recognized	all	these	women.
BOOK	XXIII
The	old	woman,	laughing	loudly,	went	to	the	upper	chamber
to	tell	her	mistress	that	her	beloved	husband	was	inside
the	house.	Her	knees	moved	swiftly,	but	her	feet	were	tottering.
She	stood	above	Penelope's	head	and	spoke	a	word	to	her:
5	‘Wake,	Penelope,	dear	child,	so	that,	with	your	own	eyes,	you	can	see	what
all	your	days	you	have	been	longing	for.
Odysseus	is	here,	he	is	in	the	house,	though	late	in	his	coming;
and	he	has	killed	the	haughty	suitors,	who	were	afflicting
his	house,	and	using	force	on	his	son,	and	eating	his	property.’
10	Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	her	in	answer:	‘Dear	nurse,	the	gods	have
driven	you	crazy.	They	are	both	able	to	change	a	very	sensible	person	into
a	senseless	one,	and	to	set	the	light-wit	on	the	way	of	discretion.
They	have	set	you	awry;	before	now	your	thoughts	were	orderly.
15	Why	do	you	insult	me	when	my	heart	is	heavy	with	sorrows,	by	talking	in
this	wild	way,	and	waking	me	from	a	happy	sleep,	which	had	come	and
covered	my	eyes,	and	held	them	fastened?
For	I	have	not	had	such	a	sleep	as	this	one,	since	the	time
when	Odysseus	went	to	that	evil,	not-to-be-mentioned	Ilion.
20	But	go	down	now,	and	take	yourself	back	into	the	palace.	If	any	of	those
other	women,	who	are	here	with	me,	had	come	with	a	message	like	yours,
and	wakened	me	from	my	slumber,	I	would	have	sent	her	back	on	her	way
to	the	hall	in	a	hateful
fashion	for	doing	it.	It	shall	be	your	age	that	saves	you.’
Penelope	comes	down	to	Odysseus
25	Then	the	beloved	nurse	Eurykleia	said	to	her	in	answer:	‘I	am	not	insulting
you,	dear	child.	It	is	all	true.	Odysseus	is	here,	he	is	in	the	house,	just	as	I
tell	you.
He	is	that	stranger-guest,	whom	all	in	the	house	were	abusing.
Telemachos	has	known	that	he	was	here	for	a	long	time,
30	but	he	was	discreet,	and	did	not	betray	the	plans	of	his	father,	so	he	might
punish	these	overbearing	men	for	their	violence.’
So	she	spoke,	and	Penelope	in	her	joy	sprang	up
from	the	bed,	and	embraced	the	old	woman,	her	eyes	streaming
tears,	and	she	spoke	to	her	and	addressed	her	in	winged	words:
35	‘Come,	dear	nurse,	and	give	me	a	true	account	of	the	matter,	whether	he
really	has	come	back	to	his	house,	as	you	tell	me,	to	lay	his	hands	on	the
shameless	suitors,	though	he	was	only
one,	and	they	were	always	lying	in	wait,	in	a	body!’
Then	the	beloved	nurse	Eurykleia	said	to	her	in	answer:
40	‘I	did	not	see,	I	was	not	told,	but	I	heard	the	outcry	of	them	being	killed;
we,	hidden	away	in	the	strong-built	storerooms,	sat	there	terrified,	and	the
closed	doors	held	us	prisoner,
until	from	inside	the	great	hall	your	son	Telemachos
summoned	me,	because	his	father	told	him	to	do	it.
45	There	I	found	Odysseus	standing	among	the	dead	men	he	had	killed,	and
they	covered	the	hardened	earth,	lying	piled	on	each	other	around	him.
You	would	have	been	cheered	to	see	him,	spattered	over	with	gore	and
battle	filth,	like	a	lion.
Now	they	lie	all	together,	by	the	doors	of	the	courtyard,
50	while	he	is	burning	a	great	fire,	and	cleaning	the	beautiful	house	with
brimstone.	He	has	sent	me	on	to	summon	you.
Come	with	me	then,	so	that	both	of	you	can	turn	your	dear	hearts
the	way	of	happiness,	since	you	have	had	so	much	to	suffer,
but	now	at	last	what	long	you	prayed	for	has	been	accomplished.
55	He	has	come	back	and	is	here	at	his	hearth,	alive,	and	has	found	you	and
his	son	in	the	palace,	and	has	taken	revenge	on	the	suitors	here	in	his
house,	for	all	the	evils	that	they	have	done	him.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘Dear	nurse,	do	not	yet	laugh	aloud	in	triumph.	You	know
60	how	welcome	he	would	be	if	he	appeared	in	the	palace:	to	all,	but	above	all
to	me	and	the	son	we	gave	birth	to.
No,	but	this	story	is	not	true	as	you	tell	it;	rather,
but	will	not	speak	to	him
some	one	of	the	immortals	has	killed	the	haughty	suitors
in	anger	over	their	wicked	deeds	and	heart-hurting	violence;
65	for	these	men	paid	no	attention	at	all	to	any	man	on	earth	who	came	their
way,	no	matter	if	he	were	base	or	noble.
So	they	suffered	for	their	own	recklessness.	But	Odysseus
has	lost	his	homecoming	and	lost	his	life,	far	from	Achaia.’
Then	the	beloved	nurse	Eurykleia	said	to	her	in	answer:
70	‘My	child,	what	sort	of	word	escaped	your	teeth's	barrier?	Though	your
husband	is	here	beside	the	hearth,	you	would	never	say	he	would	come
home.	Your	heart	was	always	mistrustful.
But	here	is	another	proof	that	is	very	clear.	I	will	tell	you.
That	scar,	which	once	the	boar	with	his	white	teeth	inflicted.
75	I	recognized	it	while	I	was	washing	his	feet,	and	I	wanted	to	tell	you	about
it,	but	he	stopped	my	mouth	with	his	hands,	would	not	let	me	speak,	for
his	mind	sought	every	advantage.	Come	then,
follow	me,	and	I	will	hazard	my	life	upon	it.
Kill	me	by	the	most	pitiful	death,	if	I	am	deceiving	you.’
80	Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	her	in	answer:	‘Dear	nurse,	it	would	be	hard
for	you	to	baffle	the	purposes	of	the	everlasting	gods,	although	you	are
very	clever.
Still,	I	will	go	to	see	my	son,	so	that	I	can	look	on
these	men	who	courted	me	lying	dead,	and	the	man	who	killed	them.’
85	She	spoke,	and	came	down	from	the	chamber,	her	heart	pondering	much,
whether	to	keep	away	and	question	her	dear	husband,	or	to	go	up	to	him
and	kiss	his	head,	taking	his	hands.
But	then,	when	she	came	in	and	stepped	over	the	stone	threshold,
she	sat	across	from	him	in	the	firelight,	facing	Odysseus,
90	by	the	opposite	wall,	while	he	was	seated	by	the	tall	pillar,	looking
downward,	and	waiting	to	find	out	if	his	majestic	wife	would	have
anything	to	say	to	him,	now	that	she	saw	him.
She	sat	a	long	time	in	silence,	and	her	heart	was	wondering.
Sometimes	she	would	look	at	him,	with	her	eyes	full	upon	him,
95	and	again	would	fail	to	know	him	in	the	foul	clothing	he	wore.	Telemachos
spoke	to	her	and	called	her	by	name	and	scolded	her:	‘My	mother,	my
harsh	mother	with	the	hard	heart	inside	you,
why	do	you	withdraw	so	from	my	father,	and	do	not
sit	beside	him	and	ask	him	questions	and	find	out	about	him?
100	No	other	woman,	with	spirit	as	stubborn	as	yours,	would	keep	back	as
you	are	doing	from	her	husband	who,	after	much	suffering,
Plans	to	deceive	the	people
came	at	last	in	the	twentieth	year	back	to	his	own	country.
But	always	you	have	a	heart	that	is	harder	than	stone	within	you.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:
105	‘My	child,	the	spirit	that	is	in	me	is	full	of	wonderment,	and	I	cannot	find
anything	to	say	to	him,	nor	question	him,	nor	look	him	straight	in	the	face.
But	if	he	is	truly	Odysseus,
and	he	has	come	home,	then	we	shall	find	other	ways,	and	better,
to	recognize	each	other,	for	we	have	signs	that	we	know	of
110	between	the	two	of	us	only,	but	they	are	secret	from	others.’
So	she	spoke,	and	much-enduring	noble	Odysseus	smiled,	and
presently	spoke	in	winged	words	to	Telemachos:	‘Telemachos,	leave	your
mother	to	examine	me	in	the	palace
as	she	will,	and	presently	she	will	understand	better;
115	but	now	that	I	am	dirty	and	wear	foul	clothing	upon	me,	she	dislikes	me
for	that,	and	says	I	am	not	her	husband.
But	let	us	make	our	plans	how	all	will	come	out	best	for	us.
For	when	one	has	killed	only	one	man	in	a	community,
and	then	there	are	not	many	avengers	to	follow,	even
120	so,	he	flees	into	exile,	leaving	kinsmen	and	country.	But	we	have	killed
what	held	the	city	together,	the	finest	young	men	in	Ithaka.	It	is	what	I
would	have	you	consider.’
Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘You	must	look	to	this	yourself,	dear	father;	for	they	say
125	you	have	the	best	mind	among	men	for	craft,	and	there	is	no	other	man
among	mortal	men	who	can	contend	with	you.
We	shall	follow	you	eagerly;	I	think	that	we	shall	not
come	short	in	warcraft,	in	so	far	as	the	strength	stays	with	us.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
130	‘So	I	will	tell	you	the	way	of	it,	how	it	seems	best	to	me.	First,	all	go	and
wash,	and	put	your	tunics	upon	you,	and	tell	the	women	in	the	palace	to
choose	out	their	clothing.
Then	let	the	inspired	singer	take	his	clear-sounding	lyre,
and	give	us	the	lead	for	festive	dance,	so	that	anyone
135	who	is	outside,	some	one	of	the	neighbors,	or	a	person	going	along	the
street,	who	hears	us,	will	think	we	are	having	a	wedding.
Let	no	rumor	go	abroad	in	the	town	that	the	suitors
have	been	murdered,	until	such	time	as	we	can	make	our	way
out	to	our	estate	with	its	many	trees,	and	once	there
140	see	what	profitable	plan	the	Olympian	shows	us.’
Odysseus	reproaches	Penelope
So	he	spoke,	and	they	listened	well	to	him	and	obeyed	him.	First	they
went	and	washed,	and	put	their	tunics	upon	them,	and	the	women	arrayed
themselves	in	their	finery,	while	the	inspired	singer	took	up	his	hollowed
lyre	and	stirred	up	within	them
145	the	impulse	for	the	sweetness	of	song	and	the	stately	dancing.	Now	the
great	house	resounded	aloud	to	the	thud	of	their	footsteps,	as	the	men
celebrated	there,	and	the	fair-girdled	women;
and	thus	would	a	person	speak	outside	the	house	who	heard	them:
‘Surely	now	someone	has	married	our	much-sought-after
150	queen;	hard-hearted,	she	had	no	patience	to	keep	the	great	house	for	her
own	wedded	lord	to	the	end,	till	he	came	back	to	her.’
So	would	a	person	speak,	but	they	did	not	know	what	had	happened.
Now	the	housekeeper	Eurynome	bathed	great-hearted
Odysseus	in	his	own	house,	and	anointed	him	with	olive	oil,
155	and	threw	a	beautiful	mantle	and	a	tunic	about	him;	and	over	his	head
Athene	suffused	great	beauty,	to	make	him	taller	to	behold	and	thicker,
and	on	his	head	she	arranged
the	curling	locks	that	hung	down	like	hyacinthine	petals.
And	as	when	a	master	craftsman	overlays	gold	on	silver,
160	and	he	is	one	who	was	taught	by	Hephaistos	and	Pallas	Athene	in	art
complete,	and	grace	is	on	every	work	he	finishes;	so	Athene	gilded	with
grace	his	head	and	his	shoulders.
Then,	looking	like	an	immortal,	he	strode	forth	from	the	bath,
and	came	back	then	and	sat	on	the	chair	from	which	he	had	risen,
165	opposite	his	wife,	and	now	he	spoke	to	her,	saying:	‘You	are	so	strange.
The	gods,	who	have	their	homes	on	Olympos,	have	made	your	heart	more
stubborn	than	for	the	rest	of	womankind.
No	other	woman,	with	spirit	as	stubborn	as	yours,	would	keep	back	as	you
are	doing	from	her	husband	who,	after	much	suffering,
170	came	at	last	in	the	twentieth	year	back	to	his	own	country.	Come	then,
nurse,	make	me	up	a	bed,	so	that	I	can	use	it	here;	for	this	woman	has	a
heart	of	iron	within	her.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘You	are	so	strange.	I	am	not	being	proud,	nor	indifferent,
175	nor	puzzled	beyond	need,	but	I	know	very	well	what	you	looked	like
when	you	went	in	the	ship	with	the	sweeping	oars,	from	Ithaka.
Come	then,	Eurykleia,	and	make	up	a	firm	bed	for	him
outside	the	well-fashioned	chamber:	that	very	bed	that	he	himself	built.	Put
the	firm	bed	here	outside	for	him,	and	cover	it
She	tricks	him	into	betraying	himself,
180	over	with	fleeces	and	blankets,	and	with	shining	coverlets.’
So	she	spoke	to	her	husband,	trying	him	out,	but	Odysseus	spoke	in
anger	to	his	virtuous-minded	lady:	‘What	you	have	said,	dear	lady,	has	hurt
my	heart	deeply.	What	man	has	put	my	bed	in	another	place?	But	it	would
be	difficult
185	for	even	a	very	expert	one,	unless	a	god,	coming	to	help	in	person,	were
easily	to	change	its	position.
But	there	is	no	mortal	man	alive,	no	strong	man,	who	lightly
could	move	the	weight	elsewhere.	There	is	one	particular	feature
in	the	bed's	construction.	I	myself,	no	other	man,	made	it.
190	There	was	the	bole	of	an	olive	tree	with	long	leaves	growing	strongly	in
the	courtyard,	and	it	was	thick,	like	a	column.
I	laid	down	my	chamber	around	this,	and	built	it,	until	I
finished	it,	with	close-set	stones,	and	roofed	it	well	over,
and	added	the	compacted	doors,	fitting	closely	together.
195	Then	I	cut	away	the	foliage	of	the	long-leaved	olive,	and	trimmed	the
trunk	from	the	roots	up,	planing	it	with	a	brazen	adze,	well	and	expertly,
and	trued	it	straight	to	a	chalkline,
making	a	bed	post	of	it,	and	bored	all	holes	with	an	auger.
I	began	with	this	and	built	my	bed,	until	it	was	finished,
200	and	decorated	it	with	gold	and	silver	and	ivory.	Then	I	lashed	it	with
thongs	of	oxhide,	dyed	bright	with	purple.
There	is	its	character,	as	I	tell	you;	but	I	do	not	know	now,
dear	lady,	whether	my	bed	is	still	in	place,	or	if	some	man
has	cut	underneath	the	stump	of	the	olive,	and	moved	it	elsewhere.’
205	So	he	spoke,	and	her	knees	and	the	heart	within	her	went	slack	as	she
recognized	the	clear	proofs	that	Odysseus	had	given;	but	then	she	burst
into	tears	and	ran	straight	to	him,	throwing	her	arms	around	the	neck	of
Odysseus,	and	kissed	his	head,	saying:	‘Do	not	be	angry	with	me,
Odysseus,	since,	beyond	other	men,
210	you	have	the	most	understanding.	The	gods	granted	us	misery,	in
jealously	over	the	thought	that	we	two,	always	together,	should	enjoy	our
youth,	and	then	come	to	the	threshold	of	old	age.
Then	do	not	now	be	angry	with	me	nor	blame	me,	because
I	did	not	greet	you,	as	I	do	now,	at	first	when	I	saw	you.
215	For	always	the	spirit	deep	in	my	very	heart	was	fearful	that	some	one	of
mortal	men	would	come	my	way	and	deceive	me	with	words.	For	there
are	many	who	scheme	for	wicked	advantage.
For	neither	would	the	daughter	born	to	Zeus,	Helen	of	Argos,
then	embraces	him
have	lain	in	love	with	an	outlander	from	another	country,
220	if	she	had	known	that	the	warlike	sons	of	the	Achaians	would	bring	her
home	again	to	the	beloved	land	of	her	fathers.
It	was	a	god	who	stirred	her	to	do	the	shameful	thing	she
did,	and	never	before	had	she	had	in	her	heart	this	terrible
wildness,	out	of	which	came	suffering	to	us	also.
225	But	now,	since	you	have	given	me	accurate	proof	describing	our	bed,
which	no	other	mortal	man	beside	has	ever	seen,	but	only	you	and	I,	and
there	is	one	serving	woman,
Aktor
's	daughter,	whom	my	father	gave	me	when	I	came	here,	who	used	to
guard	the	doors	for	us	in	our	well-built	chamber;
230	so	you	persuade	my	heart,	though	it	has	been	very	stubborn.’
She	spoke,	and	still	more	roused	in	him	the	passion	for	weeping.
He	wept	as	he	held	his	lovely	wife,	whose	thoughts	were	virtuous.
And	as	when	the	land	appears	welcome	to	men	who	are	swimming,
after	Poseidon	has	smashed	their	strong-built	ship	on	the	open
235	water,	pounding	it	with	the	weight	of	wind	and	the	heavy	seas,	and	only	a
few	escape	the	gray	water	landward	by	swimming,	with	a	thick	scurf	of
salt	coated	upon	them,
and	gladly	they	set	foot	on	the	shore,	escaping	the	evil;
so	welcome	was	her	husband	to	her	as	she	looked	upon	him,
240	and	she	could	not	let	him	go	from	the	embrace	of	her	white	arms.	Now
Dawn	of	the	rosy	fingers	would	have	dawned	on	their	weeping,	had	not
the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	planned	it	otherwise.
She	held	the	long	night	back	at	the	outward	edge,	she	detained
Dawn	of	the	golden	throne	by	the	Ocean,	and	would	not	let	her
245	harness	her	fast-footed	horses	who	bring	the	daylight	to	people:	
Lampos
and	
Phaethon
,	the	Dawn's	horses,	who	carry	her.
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	to	his	wife,	saying:
‘Dear	wife,	we	have	not	yet	come	to	the	limit	of	all	our
trials.	There	is	unmeasured	labor	left	for	the	future,
250	both	difficult	and	great,	and	all	of	it	I	must	accomplish.	So	the	soul	of
Teiresias	prophesied	to	me,	on	that	day	when	I	went	down	inside	the
house	of	Hades,	seeking
to	learn	about	homecoming,	for	myself	and	for	my	companions.
But	come,	my	wife,	let	us	go	to	bed,	so	that	at	long	last
255	we	can	enjoy	the	sweetness	of	slumber,	sleeping	together.’
Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘You	shall	have	your
going	to	bed	whenever	the	spirit
Penelope	and	Odysseus	reunited
desires	it,	now	that	the	gods	have	brought	about	your	homecoming
to	your	own	strong-founded	house	and	to	the	land	of	your	fathers.
260	But	since	the	gods	put	this	into	your	mind,	and	you	understand	it,	tell	me
what	this	trial	is,	since	I	think	I	shall	hear	of	it	later;	so	it	will	be	none	the
worse	if	I	now	hear	of	it.’
Then	in	turn	resourceful	Odysseus	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘You	are	so	strange.	Why	do	you	urge	me	on	and	tell	me
265	to	speak	of	it?	Yet	I	will	tell	you,	concealing	nothing.	Your	heart	will	have
no	joy	in	this;	and	I	myself	am	not	happy,	since	he	told	me	to	go	among
many	cities
of	men,	taking	my	well-shaped	oar	in	my	hands	and	bearing	it,
until	I	come	where	there	are	men	living	who	know	nothing
270	of	the	sea,	and	who	eat	food	that	is	not	mixed	with	salt,	who	never	have
known	ships	whose	cheeks	are	painted	purple,	who	never	have	known
well-shaped	oars,	which	act	for	ships	as	wings	do.
And	then	he	told	me	a	very	clear	proof.	I	will	not	conceal	it.
When,	as	I	walk,	some	other	wayfarer	happens	to	meet	me,
275	and	says	I	carry	a	winnow	fan	on	my	bright	shoulder,	then	I	must	plant
my	well-shaped	oar	in	the	ground,	and	render	ceremonious	sacrifice	to	the
lord	Poseidon,
one	ram	and	one	bull,	and	a	mounter	of	sows,	a	boar	pig,
and	make	my	way	home	again,	and	render	holy	hecatombs
280	to	the	immortal	gods	who	hold	the	wide	heaven,	all	of	them	in	order.
Death	will	come	to	me	from	the	sea,	in	some	altogether	unwarlike	way,
and	it	will	end	me
in	the	ebbing	time	of	a	sleek	old	age.	My	people
about	me	will	prosper.	All	this	he	told	me	would	be	accomplished.’
285	Circumspect	Penelope	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘If	the	gods	are
accomplishing	a	more	prosperous	old	age,	then	there	is	hope	that	you	shall
have	an	escape	from	your	troubles.’
Now	as	these	two	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,
meanwhile	the	nurse	and	Eurynome	were	making	the	bed	up
290	with	soft	coverings,	under	the	light	of	their	flaring	torches.	Then	when
they	had	worked	and	presently	had	a	firm	bed	made,	the	old	woman	went
away	back	to	bed	in	her	own	place,
while	Eurynome,	as	mistress	of	the	chamber,	guided	them
on	their	way	to	the	bed,	and	her	hands	held	the	torch	for	them.
295	When	she	had	brought	them	to	the	chamber	she	went	back.	They	then
gladly	went	together	to	bed,	and	their	old	ritual.
He	tells	his	story
At	this	time	Telemachos	and	the	oxherd	and	swineherd
stopped	the	beat	of	their	feet	in	the	dance,	and	stopped	the	women,	and
they	themselves	went	to	bed	in	the	shadowy	palace.
300	When	Penelope	and	Odysseus	had	enjoyed	their	lovemaking,	they	took
their	pleasure	in	talking,	each	one	telling	his	story.	She,	shining	among
women,	told	of	all	she	had	endured	in	the	palace,	as	she	watched	the
suitors,	a	ravening	company,
who	on	her	account	were	slaughtering	many	oxen
305	and	fat	sheep,	and	much	wine	was	being	drawn	from	the	wine	jars.	But
shining	Odysseus	told	of	all	the	cares	he	inflicted	on	other	men,	and	told
too	of	all	that	in	his	misery
he	had	toiled	through.	She	listened	to	him	with	delight,	nor	did	any	sleep
fall	upon	her	eyes	until	he	had	told	her	everything.
310	He	began	with	how	he	had	beaten	the	Kikonians,	and	then	gone	to	the
rich	country	of	the	men	who	feed	on	the	lotus.	He	told	all	that	the	Cyclops
had	done,	and	how	he	took	vengeance	on	him	for	his	strong	companions
he	had	eaten,	and	showed	no	pity.
How	he	came	to	Aiolos,	who	generously	received	him
315	and	gave	him	passage,	but	it	was	not	fated	for	him	to	come	back	yet	to	his
country,	so	the	stormwinds	caught	and	carried	him	out	again	on	the	sea
where	the	fish	swarm,	groaning	heavily;
and	how	he	came	to	Telepylos	of	the	Laistrygones,
and	these	men	had	destroyed	his	ships	and	strong-greaved	companions	320
[all;	but	Odysseus	only	got	away	with	his	black	ship].	He	told	her	of	the
guile	and	the	many	devices	of	Circe,	and	how	he	had	gone	into	the
moldering	home	of	Hades,
there	to	consult	the	soul	of	Theban	Teiresias,	going
in	his	ship	with	many	benches,	and	there	saw	all	his	companions,
325	and	his	mother,	who	had	borne	him	and	nursed	him	when	he	was	little.	He
told	how	he	had	heard	the	song	of	the	echoing	Sirens,	and	made	his	way
to	the	
Roving	Rocks
	and	dreaded	Charybdis	and	Skylla,	whom	no	men
ever	yet	have	escaped	without	damage.
He	told	how	his	companions	ate	the	cattle	of	Helios,
330	then	told	how	Zeus	who	thunders	on	high	had	struck	his	fast	ship	with	the
smoky	thunderbolt,	and	all	his	noble	companions	perished	alike,	only	he
escaped	the	evil	death	spirits;
and	how	he	came	to	the	island	Ogygia	and	the	nymph	Kalypso
who	detained	him	with	her,	desiring	that	he	should	be	her	husband,	335	in
her	hollow	caverns,	and	she	took	care	of	him	and	told	him
Odysseus	goes	to	see	his	father
that	she	would	make	him	ageless	all	his	days,	and	immortal,	but	never	so
could	she	persuade	the	heart	that	was	in	him;	then	how,	after	much
suffering,	he	reached	the	Phaiakians,
who	honored	him	in	their	hearts	as	if	he	were	a	god,	and	sent	him	340
back,	by	ship,	to	the	beloved	land	of	his	fathers,	bestowing	bronze	and	gold
in	abundance	on	him,	and	clothing.
And	this	was	the	last	word	he	spoke	to	her,	when	the	sweet	sleep
came	to	relax	his	limbs	and	slip	the	cares	from	his	spirit.
Then	the	goddess	gray-eyed	Athene	thought	what	to	do	next.
345	As	soon	as	she	thought	the	heart	of	Odysseus	had	full	contentment	of	the
pleasure	of	resting	in	bed	beside	his	wife,	and	of	sleeping,	immediately
she	stirred	from	Ocean	the	golden-throned	early
Dawn,	to	shine	her	light	upon	men,	and	Odysseus	rose	up
from	his	soft	bed,	and	spoke	then	to	his	wife,	telling	her:
350	‘Dear	wife,	we	both	have	had	our	full	share	of	numerous	trials	now;	yours
have	been	here	as	you	cried	over	my	much-longed-for	homecoming,	while
as	for	me,	Zeus	and	the	other	gods	held	me
back	from	my	own	country,	as	I	was	striving	to	reach	it.
But	now	that	we	two	have	come	to	our	desired	bed	together,
355	you	look	after	my	possessions	which	are	in	the	palace,	but	as	for	my
flocks,	which	the	overbearing	suitors	have	ruined,	many	I	shall	restore	by
raiding,	others	the	Achaians
shall	give	me,	until	they	have	filled	up	all	of	my	sheepfolds.
But	now	I	shall	go	to	our	estate	with	its	many	orchards,
360	to	see	my	noble	father	who	has	grieved	for	me	constantly.	But	I	tell	you
this,	my	wife,	though	you	have	your	own	understanding.
Presently,	when	the	sun	rises,	there	will	be	a	rumor
about	the	men	who	courted	you,	whom	I	killed	in	our	palace.
Then	go	to	the	upper	chamber	with	your	attendant	women,
365	and	sit	still,	looking	at	no	one,	and	do	not	ask	any	questions.’
He	spoke,	and	put	his	splendid	armor	over	his	shoulders,	and	wakened
Telemachos	and	the	oxherd	and	the	swineherd,	and	told	all	to	take	up	in
their	hands	their	warlike	weapons;
nor	did	they	disobey	him,	but	armed	themselves	in	the	bronze,	then	370
opened	the	doors	and	went	outside,	and	Odysseus	led	them.	By	now	the
light	was	over	the	earth,	but	Athene,	hiding	these	men	in	darkness,	guided
them	quickly	out	of	the	city.
BOOK	XXIV
Hermes	of	
Kyllene
	summoned	the	souls	of	the	suitors	to	come	forth,	and	in
his	hands	he	was	holding	the	beautiful	golden	staff,	with	which	he	mazes
the	eyes	of	those	mortals	whose	eyes	he	would	maze,	or	wakes	again	the
sleepers.	Herding	5	them	on	with	this,	he	led	them	along,	and	they
followed,	gibbering.
And	as	when	bats	in	the	depth	of	an	awful	cave	flitter
and	gibber,	when	one	of	them	has	fallen	out	of	his	place	in	the	chain	that
the	bats	have	formed	by	holding	one	on	another;	so,	gibbering,	they	went
their	way	together,	and	Hermes
10	the	kindly	healer	led	them	along	down	moldering	pathways.
They	went	along,	and	passed	the	Ocean	stream,	and	the	White	Rock,	and
passed	the	gates	of	Helios	the	Sun,	and	the	country
of	dreams,	and	presently	arrived	in	the	meadow	of	asphodel.
This	is	the	dwelling	place	of	souls,	images	of	dead	men.
15	There	they	found	the	soul	of	Achilleus,	the	son	of	Peleus,	the	soul	of
Patroklos,	and	the	soul	of	stately	Antilochos,	and	the	soul	of	Aias,	who	for
beauty	and	stature	was	greatest	of	all	the	Danaans,	next	to	the	blameless
son	of	Peleus.
So	these	were	gathered	around	Achilleus,	and	now	came	to	them	20	the
soul	of	Agamemnon,	the	son	of	Atreus,	sorrowing,
and	around	him	were	gathered	the	souls	of	those	others,	who	with	him	also
died	and	met	their	fate	in	the	house	of	Aigisthos.
First	of	these	two	to	speak	was	the	soul	of	the	son	of	Peleus:	‘Son	of
Atreus,	we	thought	that	all	your	days	you	were	favored
Conversation	of	Achilleus
25	beyond	all	other	heroes	by	Zeus	who	delights	in	the	thunder,	because	you
were	lord	over	numerous	people,	and	strong	ones,	in	the	land	of	the
Trojans,	where	we	Achaians	suffered	hardships.
And	yet	it	was	to	you	that	the	destructive	doom	spirit
would	come	too	early;	but	no	man	who	is	born	escapes	her.
30	How	I	wish	that,	enjoying	that	high	place	of	your	power,
you	could	have	met	death	and	destiny	in	the	land	of	the	Trojans.
So	all	the	Achaians	would	have	made	a	mound	to	cover	you,
and	you	would	have	won	great	glory	for	your	son	hereafter.
In	truth	you	were	ordained	to	die	by	a	death	most	pitiful.’
35	The	soul	of	Agamemnon,	son	of	Atreus,	answered:	‘O	happy	son	of	Peleus,
Achilleus,	like	the	immortals,	who	died	in	Troy,	far	away	from	Argos,	and
around	you	others	were	killed,	Trojans	and	the	best	men	among	the
Achaians,
as	they	fought	over	you;	and	you	in	the	turning	dust	lay
40	mightily	in	your	might,	your	horsemanship	all	forgotten.
We	fought	on	for	the	whole	day	long,	nor	would	we	ever
have	stopped	fighting,	if	Zeus	had	not	stopped	us	with	a	whirlstorm.
But	when	we	had	carried	you	to	the	ships,	away	from	the	fighting,	we	laid
you	out	on	a	litter,	and	anointed	your	handsome	body	45	with	warm	water
and	with	unguents,	and	by	you	the	Danaans
shed	many	hot	tears,	and	cut	their	hair	short	for	you;	and	also	your	mother,
hearing	the	news,	came	out	of	the	sea,	with	immortal	sea	girls	beside	her.
Immortal	crying	arose	and	spread	over	the	great	sea,	and	trembling	seized
hold	of	all	the	Achaians.
50	And	now	they	would	have	started	away,	and	gone	on	the	hollow	ships,	had
not	a	man	of	much	ancient	wisdom	halted	them,
Nestor,	whose	advice	had	also	shown	best	before	this.
He	in	kind	intention	toward	all	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them:	“Hold	fast,
Argives;	do	not	run	away,	O	young	Achaians.
55	It	is	his	mother	coming	out	of	the	sea	with	immortal
sea	girls	beside	her,	to	be	with	her	son,	who	has	perished.”
‘So	he	spoke,	and	the	great-hearted	Achaians	stayed	from
their	panic.	Around	you	stood	the	daughters	of	the	Sea's	Ancient,	mourning
piteously,	with	immortal	clothing	upon	them.
60	And	all	the	nine	Muses	in	sweet	antiphonal	singing
mourned	you,	nor	would	you	then	have	seen	any	one	of	the	Argives	not	in
tears,	so	much	did	the	singing	Muse	stir	them.
For	ten	and	seven	days,	alike	in	the	day	and	the	night	time,
and	Agamemnon	in	Hades
we	wailed	for	you,	both	mortal	people	and	the	immortals.
65	On	the	eighteenth	day	we	gave	you	to	the	fire,	and	around	you	slaughtered
a	great	number	of	fat	sheep	and	horn-curved	cattle.
You	were	burned	in	the	clothing	of	the	gods,	and	abundant
ointment	and	sweet	honey,	while	many	Achaian	heroes
moved	in	armor	about	the	pyre	where	you	were	burning,
70	with	horses	and	on	foot,	and	a	great	clamoring	rose	up.
But	after	the	flame	of	Hephaistos	had	consumed	you	utterly,	then	at	dawn
we	gathered	your	white	bones,	Achilleus,
together	with	unmixed	wine	and	unguents.	Your	mother	gave	you	a	golden
jar	with	handles.	She	said	that	it	was	a	present
75	from	
Dionysos
,	and	was	the	work	of	renowned	Hephaistos.
In	this	your	white	bones	are	laid	away,	O	shining	Achilleus,	mixed	with	the
bones	of	the	dead	Patroklos,	son	of	
Menoitios
,	and	apart	from	those	of
Antilochos,	whom	you	prized	above	all	the	rest	of	your	companions	after
the	death	of	Patroklos.
80	Around	them	then,	we,	the	chosen	host	of	the	Argive
spearmen,	piled	up	a	grave	mound	that	was	both	great	and	perfect,	on	a
jutting	promontory	there	by	the	wide	
Hellespont
,	so	that	it	can	be	seen	afar
from	out	on	the	water
by	men	now	alive	and	those	to	be	born	in	the	future.
85	Then	your	mother,	asking	the	gods	for	the	gift	of	beautiful	prizes,	set	them
in	the	field	for	the	best	of	the	Achaians.
I	in	my	time	have	attended	the	funerals	of	many
heroes,	at	those	times	when,	because	a	king	has	perished,
the	young	men	gird	themselves	for	sport	and	set	up	the	prizes;	90	but	these
your	heart	would	have	admired	beyond	any	others,
such	beautiful	prizes	as	were	set	up	by	the	goddess,	silver-footed	
Thetis
,
for	your	sake.	You	were	very	dear	to	the	gods.	So,	even	now	you	have
died,	you	have	not	lost	your	name,	but	always	in	the	sight	of	all	mankind
your	fame	shall	be	great,	Achilleus;	95	but	what	pleasure	was	there	for	me
when	I	had	wound	up	the	fighting?
In	my	homecoming	Zeus	devised	my	dismal	destruction,
to	be	killed	by	the	hands	of	my	cursed	wife,	and	Aigisthos.’
Now	as	the	spirits	were	conversing	thus	with	each	other,
there	came	approaching	them	the	courier	Argeïphontes,
100	leading	down	the	souls	of	the	suitors	killed	by	Odysseus.
These	two	in	wonderment	went	up	to	them	as	they	saw	them,
and	the	soul	of	Agamemnon,	son	of	Atreus,	recognized
The	ghost	of	the	suitor	Amphimedon
glorious	
Amphimedon
,	the	dear	son	of	
Melaneus
,	who,	in	his	home	in
Ithaka,	had	once	been	his	guest-friend.
105	First	of	the	two	to	speak	was	the	soul	of	Agamemnon:
‘Amphimedon,	what	befell	you	that	you	came	under	the	dark	earth,	all	of
you	choice	young	men,	of	the	same	age,	nor	could	one,	gathering	the	best
men	out	of	all	a	city	have	chosen	otherwise.
Was	it	with	the	ships,	and	did	Poseidon,	rousing	a	stormblast	110	of
battering	winds	and	waves	towering	prove	your	undoing?
Or	was	it	on	the	dry	land,	did	men	embattled	destroy	you
as	you	tried	to	cut	out	cattle	and	fleecy	sheep	from	their	holdings,	or
fighting	against	them,	for	the	sake	of	their	city	and	women?
Tell	me	what	I	ask.	I	claim	that	I	am	your	guest-friend.
115	Or	do	you	not	remember	when	I	came	into	your	house	there,
together	with	godlike	Menelaos,	to	rouse	up	Odysseus
so	he	would	go	to	Ilion	on	the	well-benched	vessels
with	us?	And	we	were	a	whole	month	crossing	over	the	wide	sea,	having
hardly	persuaded	Odysseus,	sacker	of	cities.’
120	Then	in	turn	the	soul	of	Amphimedon	answered	him,	saying:	‘Son	of
Atreus,	most	lordly	and	king	of	man,	Agamemnon,	I	remember	it	all,
illustrious,	as	you	tell	it.
I	will	tell	you	well	and	truthfully	the	entire	story
of	how	our	wretched	end	came	in	death,	how	it	was	accomplished.
125	We	were	courting	the	wife	of	Odysseus,	who	had	been	long	gone.
She	would	not	refuse	the	hateful	marriage,	nor	would	she	bring	it	about,
but	she	was	planning	our	death	and	black	destruction	with	this	other
stratagem	of	her	heart's	devising.
She	set	up	a	great	loom	in	her	palace,	and	set	to	weaving
130	a	web	of	threads	long	and	fine.	Then	she	said	to	us:
“Young	men,	my	suitors	now	that	the	great	Odysseus	has	perished,	wait,
though	you	are	eager	to	marry	me,	until	I	finish
this	web,	so	that	my	weaving	will	not	be	useless	and	wasted.
This	is	a	shroud	for	the	hero	Laertes,	for	when	the	destructive	135	doom	of
death,	which	lays	men	low,	shall	take	him,	lest	any	Achaian	woman	in	this
neighborhood	hold	it	against	me
that	a	man	of	many	conquests	lies	with	no	sheet	to	wind	him.”
So	she	spoke,	and	the	proud	heart	in	us	was	persuaded.
Thereafter	in	the	daytime	she	would	weave	at	her	great	loom,	140	but	in
the	night	she	would	have	torches	set	by,	and	undo	it.
So	for	three	years	she	was	secret	in	her	design,	convincing
tells	of	their	slaughter
the	Achaians,	but	when	the	fourth	year	came,	with	the	seasons	returning,
and	the	months	waned,	and	many	days	had	been	brought	to	completion,
one	of	her	women,	who	knew	the	whole	of	the	story,	told	us,	145	and	we
found	her	in	the	act	of	undoing	her	glorious	weaving.
So,	against	her	will	and	by	force,	she	had	to	finish	it.
Then	she	displayed	the	great	piece	of	weaving	that	she	had	woven.
She	had	washed	it,	and	it	shone	like	the	sun	or	the	moon.	At	that	time	an
evil	spirit,	coming	from	somewhere,	brought	back	Odysseus	150	to	the
remote	part	of	his	estate,	where	his	swineherd	was	living.
At	that	time	the	dear	son	of	godlike	Odysseus	came	over
from	sandy	Pylos,	voyaging	in	his	black	ship.	These	two,
after	compacting	their	plot	of	a	foul	death	for	the	suitors,	made	their	way	to
the	glorious	town.	In	fact	Odysseus
155	came	afterwards;	Telemachos	led	the	way,	and	the	swineherd	brought	in
Odysseus,	wearing	sorry	clothing	upon	him,
in	the	likeness	of	a	wretched	vagabond,	an	old	man
leaning	on	a	stick,	and	poor	was	the	clothing	he	had	upon	him.
Not	one	of	us,	even	of	the	older	ones,	was	able
160	to	recognize	who	he	was	when	he	appeared	so	suddenly,
but	we	treated	him	rudely	with	evil	words	and	with	blows.	Odysseus,
nevertheless,	endured	for	the	time	with	steadfast	spirit
to	be	pelted	with	missiles	and	harshly	spoken	to	in	his	own	palace;	but
then,	when	the	purpose	of	aegis-bearing	Zeus	had	stirred	him,	165	he,	with
Telemachos,	took	away	the	glorious	armor,
and	stowed	it	away	in	the	chamber,	closing	the	doors	upon	it.
Then,	in	the	craftiness	of	his	mind,	he	urged	his	lady
to	set	the	bow	and	the	gray	iron	in	front	of	the	suitors,
the	contest	for	us	ill-fated	men,	the	start	of	our	slaughter.
170	Not	one	of	us	was	able	to	hook	the	string	on	the	powerful
bow,	but	all	of	us	were	found	far	too	weak	for	it;
but	when	the	great	bow	was	given	into	the	hands	of	Odysseus,	then	all	of
us	spoke	out	and	threatened	the	man,	telling	him	not	to	give	the	bow,
however	much	he	might	argue.
175	Only	Telemachos	urged	him	on	and	told	him	to	give	it.
Then	much-enduring	Odysseus,	in	his	hand	accepting	it,
easily	strung	the	bow,	and	sent	a	shaft	through	the	iron.
He	stood	on	the	threshold,	and	scattered	out	the	swift	shafts	before	him,
glaring	terribly,	and	struck	down	the	king	Antinoös.
180	Then	he	shot	his	baneful	arrows	into	the	others,
Odysseus	finds	his	father
aiming	straight	at	them,	and	they	dropped	one	after	another.
It	could	be	seen	then	that	some	one	of	the	gods	was	helping	him,	for	these
men,	chasing	us	through	the	house	in	their	strength	and	fury,	killed	us,	one
man	after	another;	the	floor	was	smoking
185	with	blood,	and	the	horrible	cries	rose	up	as	our	heads	were	broken.
So,	Agamemnon,	we	were	destroyed,	and	still	at	this	moment
our	bodies	are	lying	uncared-for	in	the	halls	of	Odysseus;
for	our	people	in	the	house	of	each	man	know	nothing	of	this,	they	who
would	have	washed	away	from	our	wounds	the	black	blood,	190	and	laid
us	out	and	mourned	us;	for	this	is	the	right	of	the	perished.’
The	soul	of	Agamemnon,	son	of	Atreus,	answered	him:
‘O	fortunate	son	of	Laertes,	Odysseus	of	many	devices,
surely	you	won	yourself	a	wife	endowed	with	great	virtue.
How	good	was	proved	the	heart	that	is	in	blameless	Penelope,	195	Ikarios'
daughter,	and	how	well	she	remembered	Odysseus,
her	wedded	husband.	Thereby	the	fame	of	her	virtue	shall	never	die	away,
but	the	immortals	will	make	for	the	people
of	earth	a	thing	of	grace	in	the	song	for	prudent	Penelope.
Not	so	did	the	daughter	of	
Tyndareos
	fashion	her	evil	200	deeds,	when	she
killed	her	wedded	lord,	and	a	song	of	loathing	will	be	hers	among	men,	to
make	evil	the	reputation
of	womankind,	even	for	one	whose	acts	are	virtuous.’
So	these	two	were	conversing	each	with	the	other,	standing
in	the	gates	of	Hades,	underneath	the	earth's	secret	places.
205	The	others	went	from	the	city,	and	presently	came	to	the	country	place	of
Laertes,	handsomely	cultivated.	Laertes	himself	had	reclaimed	it,	after	he
spent	much	labor	upon	it.
There	was	his	house,	and	all	around	the	house	ran	a	shelter,	in	which	the
slaves,	who	worked	at	his	pleasure	under	compulsion,	210	would	take	their
meals,	and	sit,	and	pass	the	night.	There	was	also	an	old	Sicilian	woman
there,	who	duly	looked	after
the	old	man	out	on	the	estate,	far	away	from	the	city.
There	Odysseus	spoke	a	word	to	his	son	and	his	servants:
‘Go	now,	all	of	you,	inside	the	strong-fashioned	building,
215	and	sacrifice	the	best	of	all	the	pigs	for	our	dinner
presently;	but	I	myself	will	make	trial	of	my	father,
to	see	whether	he	will	know	me	and	his	eyes	recognize	me,
or	fail	to	know	me,	with	all	this	time	that	has	grown	upon	me.’
So	he	spoke,	and	gave	his	thralls	their	weapons	of	warfare,
Laertes	on	his	farm
220	and	they	went	quickly	on	their	way	to	the	house;	but	Odysseus	went
closer	to	the	abundant	orchard,	searching.	He	did	not
find	either	Dolios,	as	he	came	into	the	great	orchard,
nor	any	of	his	thralls,	nor	his	sons,	for	all	these	had	gone	off	to	gather
stones	and	make	them	into	a	wall	retaining
225	the	orchard,	and	the	old	man	had	guided	them	on	their	errand;	but	he	did
find	his	father	alone	in	the	well-worked	orchard,	spading	out	a	plant,	and
he	had	a	squalid	tunic	upon	him,
patched	together	and	ugly,	and	on	his	legs	he	had	oxhide
gaiters	fastened	and	patched	together,	to	prevent	scratching,	230	and	gloves
on	his	hands	because	of	the	bushes,	and	he	was	wearing	a	cap	of	goatskin
on	his	head,	to	increase	his	misery.
Now	when	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	observed	him,
with	great	misery	in	his	heart,	and	oppressed	by	old	age,
he	stood	underneath	a	towering	pear	tree	and	shed	tears	for	him,	235	and
deliberated	then	in	his	heart	and	his	spirit
whether	to	embrace	his	father	and	kiss	him	and	tell	him
everything,	how	he	was	come	again	to	his	own	dear	country,
or	question	him	first	about	everything,	and	make	trial	of	him.
In	the	division	of	his	heart	this	way	seemed	best	to	him,
240	first	to	make	trial	of	him	and	speak	in	words	of	mockery.
With	this	in	mind,	noble	Odysseus	came	straight	up	to	him.
He	was	digging	around	a	plant	with	his	head	held	downward,
and	now	his	glorious	son	stood	near,	and	spoke	to	him,	saying:	‘Old	sir,
there	is	in	you	no	lack	of	expertness	in	tending
245	your	orchard;	everything	is	well	cared	for,	and	there	is	never	a	plant,
neither	fig	tree	nor	yet	grapevine	nor	olive
nor	pear	tree	nor	leek	bed	uncared	for	in	your	garden.
But	I	will	also	tell	you	this;	do	not	take	it	as	cause	for
anger.	You	yourself	are	ill	cared	for;	together	with	dismal	250	old	age,
which	is	yours,	you	are	squalid	and	wear	foul	clothing	upon	you.
It	is	not	for	your	laziness	that	your	lord	does	not	take	care	of	you,	nor	is
your	stature	and	beauty,	as	I	see	it,	such	as
ought	to	belong	to	a	slave.	You	look	like	a	man	who	is	royal,	and	such	a
one	as	who,	after	he	has	bathed	and	eaten,
255	should	sleep	on	a	soft	bed;	for	such	is	the	right	of	the	elders.
But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
What	man's	thrall	are	you?	Whose	orchard	are	you	laboring?
And	tell	me	this	and	tell	me	truly,	so	that	I	may	know
Recognition	of	Odysseus
whether	this	is	really	Ithaka	I	have	come	to,	as	that	man
260	told	me	just	now	as	I	encountered	him	on	my	way	here:
not	a	very	sensible	man,	for	he	had	no	patience
to	tell	me	all	or	listen	to	what	I	said,	when	I	asked	him
about	my	friend	from	abroad,	whether	he	still	lives	and	is	somewhere	here,
or	is	dead	now	and	down	in	the	house	of	Hades.
265	And	I	tell	you	this;	listen	to	me	and	understand	me.
Once	I	entertained	a	friend	in	my	own	dear	country,
when	he	came	to	our	house,	nor	has	any	man	been	dearer
to	me,	among	all	those	who	have	come	from	afar	to	my	palace.
He	announced	that	he	was	by	birth	a	man	of	Ithaka,
270	and	said	that	his	father	was	Laertes,	son	of	Arkeisios.
I	took	him	into	my	own	house	and	well	entertained	him
with	proper	hospitality,	since	there	was	abundance
in	the	house,	and	gave	him	presents	of	friendship,	as	was	becoming.
I	gave	him	seven	talents	of	well-wrought	gold,	and	I	gave	him	275	a
mixing	bowl	made	all	of	silver,	with	flowers	wrought	on	it,	and	twelve
mantles	to	be	worn	single,	as	many	blankets,
as	many	handsome	cloaks,	also	the	same	number	of	tunics,
and	aside	from	these	four	comely	women,	whose	skill	in	handiwork	was
without	fault;	and	he	could	choose	the	ones	that	he	wanted.’
280	Then	his	father,	shedding	tears,	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘Friend,	this	land
that	you	have	reached	is	the	one	you	were	seeking;	but	violent	and
reckless	men	are	in	control	of	it,
and	the	grace	of	those	countless	gifts	you	gave	is	all	gone	for	nothing.
If	you	had	found	him	yet	alive	in	the	land	of	Ithaka,
285	he	would	have	sent	you	along	with	gifts	in	return,	and	given	good
entertainment,	as	is	right	for	him	who	has	given.
But	come	now,	tell	me	this	and	give	me	an	accurate	answer.
How	many	years	is	it	since	you	entertained	that	unhappy
guest	of	yours,	my	son—did	he	ever	live?—an	ill-starred
290	man,	one	whom,	far	from	his	country	and	his	own	people,
the	fish	have	eaten	in	the	great	sea,	or	else	on	the	dry	land	he	has	been
spoil	for	wild	beasts	and	for	birds;	and	his	mother	and	father,	whose	child
he	was,	did	not	give	him	his	rites	nor	mourn	him,	nor	yet	did	his	bountiful
wife,	circumspect	Penelope,
295	wail	for	her	husband	on	his	bier,	as	would	have	been	fitting,	nor	close	his
eyes;	for	that	is	the	right	of	those	who	have	perished.
But	tell	me	this	too,	tell	me	truly,	so	that	I	may	know	it.
by	Laertes	his	father
What	man	are	you	and	whence?	Where	is	your	city?	Your	parents?
Where	is	your	swift	ship	standing	now,	that	brought	you	to	this	place,	300
and	your	godlike	companions?	Or	did	you	come	as	a	passenger	in	someone
else's	ship,	and	they	let	you	off,	and	went	on?’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘See,	I	will	accurately	answer	all	that	you	ask	me.
I	am	from	
Alybas
,	where	I	live	in	a	famous	dwelling,	305	and	am	the	son
of	
Apheidas
,	son	of	the	lord	
Polypemon
.
My	own	name	is	
Eperitos
;	now	the	divinity	drove	me	here	on	my	way
against	my	will,	from	
Sikania
.
And	my	ship	stands	nearby,	off	the	country,	away	from	the	city.
But	as	for	Odysseus,	this	is	by	now	the	fifth	year	since
310	he	went	from	there,	and	took	his	departure	out	of	my	country.
Unhappy	man.	Indeed,	the	bird	signs	were	good	at	his	going.
They	were	on	his	right;	and	I	too	rejoiced	as	I	sent	him
off,	and	he	rejoiced	as	he	went.	My	heart	was	still	hopeful	that	we	would
meet	in	friendship	and	give	glorious	presents.’
315	He	spoke,	and	the	black	cloud	of	sorrow	closed	on	Laertes.	In	both	hands
he	caught	up	the	grimy	dust	and	poured	it	over	his	face	and	grizzled	head,
groaning	incessantly.
The	spirit	rose	up	in	Odysseus,	and	now	in	his	nostrils
there	was	a	shock	of	bitter	force	as	he	looked	on	his	father.
320	He	sprang	to	him	and	embraced	and	kissed	and	then	said	to	him:	‘Father,	I
am	he,	the	man	whom	you	ask	about.	I	am
here,	come	back	in	the	twentieth	year	to	the	land	of	my	father.
But	stay	now	from	your	weeping,	shedding	of	tears,	and	outcry,	for	I	tell
you	this	straight	out;	the	need	for	haste	is	upon	us.
325	I	have	killed	the	suitors	who	were	in	our	palace,	avenging	all	their	heart-
hurting	outrage	and	their	evil	devisings.’
Then	in	turn	Laertes	answered	him	and	said	to	him:
‘If	in	truth	you	are	Odysseus,	my	son,	who	have	come	back
here,	give	me	some	unmistakable	sign,	so	that	I	can	believe	you.’
330	Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:	‘First,	then,
look	with	your	eyes	upon	this	scar	and	know	it.
The	wild	boar	inflicted	it	with	his	white	tusk,	on	Parnassos,	when	I	went
there;	for	you	and	my	queenly	mother	had	sent	me	to	Autolykos,	my
mother's	dear	father,	so	I	could	be	given
335	those	gifts,	which	he	promised	me	and	consented	to	when	he	came	to	us.
Or	come	then,	let	me	tell	you	of	the	trees	in	the	well-worked
Reunion	of	Odysseus
orchard,	which	you	gave	me	once.	I	asked	you	of	each	one,
when	I	was	a	child,	following	you	through	the	garden.	We	went	among	the
trees,	and	you	named	them	all	and	told	me	what	each	one	340	was,	and	you
gave	me	thirteen	pear	trees,	and	ten	apple	trees,	and	forty	fig	trees;	and	so
also	you	named	the	fifty
vines	you	would	give.	Each	of	them	bore	regularly,	for	there	were	grapes	at
every	stage	upon	them,	whenever	the	seasons
of	Zeus	came	down	from	the	sky	upon	them,	to	make	them	heavy.’
345	He	spoke,	and	Laertes'	knees	and	the	heart	within	him	went	slack,	as	he
recognized	the	clear	proofs	that	Odysseus	had	given.
He	threw	his	arms	around	his	dear	son,	and	much-enduring
great	Odysseus	held	him	close,	for	his	spirit	was	fainting.
But	when	he	had	got	his	breath	back	again,	and	the	spirit	gathered	350	into
his	heart,	once	more	he	said	to	him,	answering:
‘Father	Zeus,	there	are	gods	indeed	upon	tall	Olympos,
if	truly	the	suitors	have	had	to	pay	for	their	reckless	violence.
But	now	I	am	terribly	afraid	in	my	heart	that	speedily
the	men	of	Ithaka	may	come	against	us	here,	and	send	out
355	messages	everywhere	to	the	Kephallenian	cities.’
Then	resourceful	Odysseus	spoke	in	turn	and	answered	him:
‘Never	fear,	let	these	concerns	not	trouble	your	thinking;
but	let	us	go	to	the	house	which	lies	here	next	to	the	orchard,	for	there	I
sent	Telemachos	on	ahead,	with	the	oxherd
360	and	the	swineherd,	so	that	they	could	most	quickly	prepare	our	dinner.’
So	he	spoke,	and	the	two	went	into	the	handsome	dwelling;
and	when	they	had	come	into	the	well-established	dwelling	place,	there
they	found	Telemachos,	and	the	oxherd	and	swineherd,
cutting	up	a	great	deal	of	meat,	and	mixing	the	bright	wine.
365	Meanwhile	the	Sicilian	serving	maid	bathed	great-hearted	Laertes	in	his
house,	and	anointed	him	with	olive	oil,	then	threw	a	handsome	mantle
about	him.	Also,	Athene,
standing	by	the	shepherd	of	the	people,	filled	his	limbs	out,	and	made	him
taller	and	thicker	to	behold	than	he	had	been.
370	He	stepped	forth	from	the	bath,	and	his	son	looked	on	in	amazement	as	he
saw	him	looking	like	one	of	the	immortal	gods	to	encounter.
So	he	spoke	to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words,	saying:	‘Father,
surely	some	one	of	the	gods	who	are	everlasting
has	made	you	better	to	look	upon	for	beauty	and	stature.’
375	Then	in	turn	the	thoughtful	Laertes	said	to	him	in	answer:
with	Dolios	and	his	sons
‘O	father	Zeus,	Athene	and	Apollo,	if	only	as	I	was	when,	lord	of	the
Kephallenians,	I	took	
Nerikos
,	the	strong-founded	citadel	on	the	mainland
cape;	if	only	I	could	have	been	such	yesterday	in	the	palace,	380	with
armor	upon	my	shoulders,	to	stand	beside	you	and	fight	off	the	suitors'
attack;	so	I	would	have	unstrung	the	knees	of	many	there	in	the	hall,	and
your	heart	within	you	would	have	been	gladdened.’
Now	these	two	were	thus	conversing	one	with	the	other.
And	all,	when	they	had	finished	their	work	and	made	ready	their	dinner,
385	took	their	places	in	order	on	chairs	and	along	the	benches.
Then	they	were	putting	their	hands	to	the	dinner,	and	now	there	drew	near
the	aged	Dolios,	and	the	old	man's	sons	were	with	him,
coming	from	their	toilsome	work,	for	their	mother	had	called	them.
This	was	the	old	Sicilian	woman,	who	had	raised	them,	and	carefully	390
looked	after	the	old	man,	now	that	great	age	had	seized	him.
These,	when	they	saw	Odysseus	and	recognized	his	identity,
stood	still	in	the	hall	in	astonishment;	but	Odysseus
had	words	of	conciliation	for	them,	and	so	he	addressed	them:	‘Sit	to
dinner	with	us,	old	man,	and	let	be	your	wonder;
395	for	a	long	time	now	we	have	been	eager	to	put	our	hands	to	food,	but	we
waited	for	you	in	the	halls,	ever	expecting	you.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Dolios,	opening	his	arms	wide,	ran	straight
to	him,	and	took	Odysseus'	hand	at	the	wrist,	and	kissed	it,	and	spoke	aloud
to	him	and	addressed	him	in	winged	words,	saying:	400	‘Dear	master,
since	you	have	come	back	to	us,	who	wanted	you	but	expected	you	no
more—but	the	very	gods	have	brought	you	back—we	heartily	welcome
you;	may	the	gods	give	you	blessings.
And	tell	me	this	and	tell	me	truly,	so	that	I	may	know	it.
Does	circumspect	Penelope	know	all	the	truth	of	this
405	and	that	you	have	come	back,	or	shall	we	send	her	a	messenger?’
Then	in	turn	resourceful	Odysseus	said	to	him	in	answer:
‘She	already	knows,	old	man.	Why	should	you	trouble	to	do	this?’
He	spoke,	and	Dolios	sat	down	again	on	the	polished
chair;	so	too,	around	great	Odysseus,	the	sons	of	Dolios
410	came	to	speak	to	him	in	welcome,	and	shake	hands	with	him,	and	then
went	back	in	order	to	sit	by	their	father,	Dolios.
So	these	were	busy	in	the	hall	preparing	their	dinner;
but	Rumor,	a	messenger,	went	swiftly	through	all	the	city,
The	kinsmen	of	the	suitors
crying	aloud	the	terrible	death	and	doom	of	the	suitors;
415	and	the	people	as	they	heard	it	came,	from	their	several	places,	to	gather,
with	groaning	and	outcry,	before	the	house	of	Odysseus.
They	carried	the	corpses	out	of	the	house,	and	each	one	buried	his	own,
and	sent	back	all	who	had	come	from	the	other	cities,	giving	them	in
charge	of	fishermen	to	take	in	their	fast	ships.
420	They	themselves,	sorrowful	at	heart,	gathered	in	assembly.
But	when	they	were	all	assembled	and	in	one	place	together,	Eupeithes
stood	up	and	addressed	them,	since	unforgettable
sorrow	was	stored	away	in	his	heart	for	the	sake	of	Antinoös,	his	son,	who
was	the	first	to	be	killed	by	noble	Odysseus.
425	For	his	sake	weeping	tears	he	now	stood	forth	and	addressed	them:
‘Friends,	this	man's	will	worked	great	evil	upon	the	Achaians.
First	he	took	many	excellent	men	away	in	the	vessels
with	him,	and	lost	the	hollow	ships,	and	lost	all	the	people,	and	then
returning	killed	the	best	men	of	the	Kephallenians.
430	Come	then,	before	he	can	make	his	way	quickly	over	to	Pylos,	or	else	to
shining	Elis,	where	the	Epeians	are	lords,	let	us	go,	or	else	we	shall	then
be	shamed	forever;	all	this
shall	be	a	disgrace,	even	for	the	men	hereafter	to	hear	of,	if	we	do	not	take
revenge	on	the	murderers	of	our	brothers
435	and	sons;	for	there	would	be	no	pleasure	in	my	heart	to	go	on	living,	but	I
would	wish	to	die	and	be	with	the	perished.
So	let	us	go,	before	they	cross	the	sea,	and	escape	us.’
He	spoke,	weeping,	and	pity	took	hold	of	all	the	Achaians.
But	now	Medon	arrived,	and	with	him	the	inspired	singer,
440	from	the	palace	of	Odysseus,	since	now	the	sleep	had	left	them;	they
stood	in	their	midst,	and	amazement	seized	upon	each	man	of	them.
Then	Medon,	full	of	prudent	thoughts,	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them:
‘Hear	me	now,	you	men	of	Ithaka;	for	Odysseus
devised	what	he	did,	not	without	the	consent	of	immortal
445	gods.	I	myself	saw	an	immortal	god	who	was	standing
beside	Odysseus.	In	every	way	it	resembled	Mentor.
An	immortal	god	was	seen,	at	one	time	in	front	of	Odysseus
urging	him	on,	and	then	next	time	he	would	rout	the	suitors,	and	dash
about	the	hall,	while	they	fell	one	after	another.’
450	So	he	spoke,	and	the	green	fear	took	hold	of	all	of	them.	Now	Halitherses,
Mastor's	son,	an	aged	warrior,	spoke	to	them.	He	alone	saw	what	was
before	and	behind	him.
assemble	and	plan	revenge
Now	in	kind	intention	toward	all	he	spoke	forth	and	addressed	them:	‘Hear
me	now,	you	men	of	Ithaka;	hear	what	I	tell	you.
455	It	is	by	your	own	weakness,	dear	friends,	that	these	things	have	happened.
You	would	not	listen	to	me,	nor	to	Mentor,	shepherd	of	the	people,	when
we	told	you	to	make	your	sons	give	over	their	senseless	mood;	for	they,	in
their	evil	recklessness,	did	a	great	wrong	in	showing	no	respect	to	the	wife,
despoiling	the	possessions,	460	of	a	lordly	man.	They	thought	that	he	never
would	be	coming	home.	Now	let	it	be	thus.	Hear	me,	and	do	as	I	tell	you.
Let	us	not	go	there.	He	who	does	might	incur	some	evil.’
So	he	spoke,	but	more	than	half	who	were	there	sprang	up
with	a	great	cry—though	others	stayed	where	they	were	assembled—	465
since	Halitherses'	speech	did	not	please	their	hearts,	but	they	listened	to
Eupeithes,	and	now	suddenly	they	ran	for	their	armor.
Now	they,	when	in	the	shining	bronze	they	had	shrouded	their	bodies,
assembled	all	in	a	body	in	front	of	the	spacious	city.
Eupeithes	was	their	leader	in	their	foolishness.	He	thought	470	he	would
avenge	the	slaughter	of	his	son,	but	he	was	not
ever	to	come	back,	but	must	himself	encounter	his	death	there.
Now	Athene	spoke	a	word	to	Zeus,	son	of	Kronos:
‘Son	of	Kronos,	our	father,	O	lordliest	of	the	mighty,
tell	me	what	I	ask.	What	does	your	mind	have	hidden	within	it?
475	Will	you	first	inflict	evil	fighting	upon	them,	and	terrible	strife,	or	will
you	establish	friendship	between	the	two	factions?’
Then	Zeus	the	gatherer	of	the	clouds	said	to	her	in	answer:
‘My	child,	why	do	you	ask	and	question	me	in	these	matters?
For	was	not	this	your	own	intention,	as	you	have	counseled	it,	480	how
Odysseus	should	make	his	way	back,	and	punish	those	others?
Do	as	you	will;	but	I	will	tell	you	how	it	is	proper.
Now	that	noble	Odysseus	has	punished	the	suitors,	let	them
make	their	oaths	of	faith	and	friendship,	and	let	him	be	king	always;	and
let	us	make	them	forget	the	death	of	their	brothers	485	and	sons,	and	let
them	be	friends	with	each	other,	as	in	the	time	past,	and	let	them	have
prosperity	and	peace	in	abundance.’
So	he	spoke,	and	stirred	on	Athene,	who	was	eager	before	this,
and	she	went	in	a	flash	of	speed	down	the	pinnacles	of	Olympos.
When	the	men	had	put	away	their	desire	for	delicious	feasting,
490	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	began	speaking	among	them:
‘Let	someone	go	out	now	and	see	if	they	are	approaching.’
Final	battle
He	spoke,	and	Dolios'	son	went	out,	as	Odysseus	told	him.
He	went	and	stood	on	the	threshold	and	saw	them	all	drawing	closer.
Now	presently	he	spoke	in	winged	words	to	Odysseus:
495	‘Here	they	are,	coming	close	to	us,	so	let	us	arm	quickly.’
So	he	spoke,	and	they	sprang	up	and	put	on	their	armor,
Odysseus	with	his	three,	and	the	six	sons	of	Dolios;
and	with	them	Dolios	and	Laertes	put	on	their	armor,
gray	though	they	were,	but	they	were	fighters	perforce.	And	now,	500
when	all	of	them	in	shining	bronze	had	shrouded	their	bodies,	they	opened
the	doors,	and	went	outside,	and	Odysseus	led	them.
But	now	came	their	way	the	daughter	of	Zeus,	Athene,
likening	herself	in	appearance	and	voice	to	Mentor.
Seeing	her,	much-enduring	great	Odysseus	was	happy,
505	and	presently	he	spoke	to	his	dear	son,	Telemachos:
‘Telemachos,	now	yourself	being	present,	where	men	do	battle,	and	the
bravest	are	singled	out	from	the	rest,	you	must	be	certain	not	to	shame	the
blood	of	your	fathers,	for	we	in	time	past	all	across	the	world	have
surpassed	in	manhood	and	valor.’
510	Then	the	thoughtful	Telemachos	said	to	him	in	answer:	‘You	will	see,
dear	father,	if	you	wish,	that	as	far	as	my	will	goes,	I	will	not	shame	my
blood	that	comes	from	you,	which	you	speak	of.’
So	he	spoke,	and	Laertes	also	rejoiced,	and	said	to	them:
‘What	day	is	this	for	me,	dear	gods?	I	am	very	happy.
515	My	son	and	my	son's	son	are	contending	over	their	courage.’
Then	standing	close	beside	him	gray-eyed	Athene	said	to	him:
‘Son	of	Arkeisios,	far	dearest	of	all	my	companions,
make	your	prayer	to	the	gray-eyed	girl	and	to	Zeus	her	father,	then	quickly
balance	your	far-shadowing	spear,	and	throw	it.’
520	So	Pallas	Athene	spoke,	and	breathed	into	him	enormous	strength,	and,
making	his	prayer	then	to	the	daughter	of	great	Zeus,	he	quickly	balanced
his	far-shadowing	spear,	and	threw	it,
and	struck	Eupeithes	on	the	brazen	side	of	his	helmet,
nor	could	the	helm	hold	off	the	spear,	but	the	bronze	smashed	clean
through.
525	He	fell,	thunderously,	and	his	armor	clattered	upon	him.
Odysseus	and	his	glorious	son	fell	upon	their	front	fighters,	and	began	to
strike	with	swords	and	stab	with	spears	leaf-headed.
And	now	they	would	have	killed	them	all,	and	given	none	of	them
homecoming,	had	not	Athene,	daughter	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis,
Reconciliation	by	Athene
530	cried	out	in	a	great	voice	and	held	back	all	the	company:
‘Hold	back,	men	of	Ithaka,	from	the	wearisome	fighting,
so	that	most	soon,	and	without	blood,	you	can	settle	everything.’
So	spoke	Athene,	and	the	green	fear	took	hold	of	them,
and	in	their	terror	they	let	fall	from	their	hands	their	weapons,	535	which
fell	all	on	the	ground	at	the	cry	of	the	goddess	speaking.
Striving	to	save	their	lives,	they	turned	in	flight	toward	the	city.
With	a	terrible	cry,	much-enduring	Odysseus,	gathering
himself	together,	made	a	swoop,	like	a	high-flown	eagle.
But	the	son	of	Kronos	then	threw	down	a	smoky	thunderbolt,
540	which	fell	in	front	of	the	gray-eyed	daughter	of	the	great	father.
Then	the	gray-eyed	goddess	Athene	said	to	Odysseus:
‘Son	of	Laertes	and	seed	of	Zeus,	resourceful	Odysseus,
hold	hard,	stop	this	quarrel	in	closing	combat,	for	fear
Zeus	of	the	wide	brows,	son	of	Kronos,	may	be	angry	with	you.’
545	So	spoke	Athene,	and	with	happy	heart	he	obeyed	her.	And	pledges	for
the	days	to	come,	sworn	to	by	both	sides,	were	settled	by	Pallas	Athene,
daughter	of	Zeus	of	the	aegis,	who	had	likened	herself	in	appearance	and
voice	to	Mentor.
GLOSSARY
NOTE
.	In	the	spelling	of	names,	I	have	followed	the	same	practice	as	in	my
translation	of	the	
Iliad
.	Mostly,	I	have	simply	transliterated	the	Greek,	as	for
instance	
Agelaos
,	not	
Agelaus
.	In	some	cases,	however,	I	have	made	exceptions
and	followed	familiar	usage;	and	sometimes	I	have	simply	translated	(
Dawn,
Graces
).	The	exceptions	to	my	normal	practice	are:	Achaians,	Apollo,	Argives,
Athens,	Circe,	Crete,	Cyclopes,	Cyprus,	Danaans,	Dawn,	Dorians,	Egypt,
Elysian	Field,	Graces,	Hades,	Helen,	Hermes,	Jason,	Lotus-Eaters,	Ocean,
Penelope,	Phoenicia	and	Phoenicians,	Priam,	Roving	Rocks,	Sicilians,	Sirens,
Thrace,	Trojans,	Troy.
This	glossary	is	not	an	index,	but	gives	at	least	one	reference	for	each	name.
Reference	are	to	book	and	line.
	
Achai'ans
:	The	most	general	term	for	“Greeks,”	including	the	people	of
Ithaka,	i.90;	ii.7,	
etc.
A'cheron
:	River	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	x.514.
Achil'leus
:	The	great	hero	of	the	
Iliad
,	whose	ghost	talked	to	Odysseus,
xi.467,	
etc.
Adres'te
:	Handmaid	of	Helen,	iv.122.
Agamem'non
:	Leader	of	the	expedition	against	Troy,	murdered	by
Aigisthos,	i.30;	iii.143,	
etc.
Agela'os
:	Son	of	Damastor,	a	suitor,	xx.321,	etc.;	killed	by	Odysseus,
xxii.293.
Aiai'a
:	Circe's	island,	x.135.
Ai'akos
:	Father	of	Peleus,	grandfather	of	Achilleus,	xi.471,	538.
Ai'as
:	(1)	Son	of	Telamon,	who	quarreled	with	Odysseus	over	the	armor	of
Achilleus,	xi.469,	etc.;	(2)	son	of	Oïleus,	drowned	by	Poseidon,	iv.499-
510.
Aie'tes
:	Brother	of	Circe,	x.137;	xii.70.
Ai'gai
:	City	in	Achaia,	favored	by	Poseidon,	v.381.
Aigis'thos
:	Son	of	Thyestes,	lover	of	Klytaimestra	and	murderer	of
Agamemnon,	killed	by	Orestes,	i.29;	iii.194,	
etc.
Aigyp'tios
:	Elder	of	Ithaka,	father	of	Eurynomos,	ii.15.
Aigy'ptos
:	The	river	of	Egypt,	the	Nile,	xiv.257.
Aio'lia
:	The	island	of	Aiolos	(1),	x.1.
Ai'olos
:	(1)	Mortal	king	in	charge	of	the	winds,	x.1;	(2)	father	of	Kretheus,
xi.237.
Ai'son
:	Son	of	Tyro	and	Kretheus,	xi.259.
Aithio'pians
:	The	Ethiopians,	a	distant	people	visited	by	Poseidon,	i.22;
v.282,	
etc.
Ai'thon
:	Name	assumed	by	Odysseus	in	conversation	with	Penelope,
xix.183.
Aito'lia
:	Country	in	central	Greece,	xiv.379.
Akas'tos
:	A	king	in	western	Greece,	xiv.336.
Akro'neos
:	A	Phaiakian,	viii.111.
Ak'toris
:	Maid	of	Penelope,	xxiii.228.
Alek'tor
:	A	Spartan,	whose	daughter	married	Megapenthes,	iv.10.
Alkan'dre
:	Lady	of	Thebes	in	Egypt,	wife	of	Polybos	(2),	iv.126.
Al'kimos
:	Father	of	Mentor,	xxii.234.
Alki'noös
:	King	of	the	Phaiakians,	vi.12;	vii.185,	
etc.
Alkip'pe
:	Handmaid	of	Helen,	iv.124.
Alkmai'on
:	Son	of	Amphiaraos,	xv.248.
Alkme'ne
:	Mother	of	Herakles,	ii.120;	xi.266.
Alo'eus
:	Husband	of	Iphimedeia,	putative	father	of	Otos	and	Ephialtes,
xi.305.
Alphei'os
:	River	in	the	western	Peloponnese,	iii.489.
A'lybas
:	City	of	unknown	location	from	which	Odysseus	pretended	to	have
come,	xxiv.304.
Amni'sos
:	A	place	in	Crete,	xix.188.
Amphi'alos
:	A	Phaiakian,	winner	in	jumping,	viii.114;	128.
Amphiara'os
:	Son	of	Oïkles	and	grandfather	of	Theoklymenos.	He	was	one
of	the	seven	against	Thebes,	xv.244-247.
Amphi'lochos
:	Son	of	Amphiaraos,	xv.248.
Amphi'medon
:	One	of	the	suitors,	xxii.242;	killed	by	Telemachos,	xxii.284;
his	ghost	told	the	ghost	of	Agamemnon	about	the	slaughter	of	the
suitors,	xxiv.103.
Amphi'nomos
:	One	of	the	suitors,	xvi.351;	son	of	Nisos,	from	Doulichion,
best	of	the	suitors	and	best	liked	by	Penelope,	xvi.394;	befriended
Odysseus	and	was	warned	by	him,	xviii.	119-150;	killed	by	Telemachos,
xxii.89-94.
Amphi'on
:	(1)	Son	of	Antiope,	and	builder,	with	his	brother	Zethos,	of
Thebes,	xi.262;	(2)	lord	of	Minyan	Orchomenos,	xi.283.
Amphi'thea
:	Grandmother	of	Odysseus,	xix.416.
Amphitri'te
:	Queen	of	the	sea,	iii.91,	
etc.
Amphi'tryon
:	Husband	of	Alkmene,	putative	father	of	Herakles,	xi.266.
Amytha'on
:	Son	of	Kretheus	and	Tyro,	xi.259.
Anabasi'neos
:	A	Phaiakian,	viii.113.
Anchi'alos
:	(1)	Father	of	Mentes,	i.180;	(2)	a	Phaiakian,	viii.112.
Andrai'mon
:	Father	of	Thoas,	xiv.499.
Antiklei'a
:	Mother	of	Odysseus,	xi.85.
Anti'klos
:	One	of	the	Achaians	in	the	Wooden	Horse,	iv.286.
Anti'lochos
:	Son	of	Nestor,	killed	at	Troy	by	Memnon,	iii.112;	iv.187,	
etc.
Anti'noös
:	Son	of	Eupeithes,	one	of	the	two	leading	suitors,	i.383;	ii.84,	etc.;
struck	Odysseus	with	footstool,	xvii.462;	first	to	be	killed,	by	Odysseus,
xxii.8.
Anti'ope
:	Daughter	of	Asopos,	mother	of	Amphion	and	Zethos,	xi.260.
Anti'phates
:	(1)	King	of	the	Laistrygones,	x.107;	(2)	father	of	Oïkles,	xv.242.
An'tiphos
:	(1)	Companion	of	Odysseus,	killed	by	the	Cyclops,	ii.17;	(2)	an
elder	of	Ithaka,	xvii.68.
Apeir'e
:	The	home	of	Eurymedousa,	vii.8.
Aphei'das
:	Pretended	name	of	Odysseus'	father	in	his	conversation	with
Laertes,	xxiv.305.
Aphrodi'te
:	Daughter	of	Zeus,	goddess	of	love	and	beauty,	iv.14,	
etc.
	In	the
Odyssey
	(though	not	in	the	
Iliad
)	she	is	the	wife	of	Hephaistos,	viii.267,
etc.
Apol'lo
:	Or	Phoibos	Apollo,	son	of	Zeus	and	Leto,	iii.279,	
etc.
	He	plays	no
major	part	in	the	
Odyssey
,	but	the	day	when	the	suitors	are	killed	is	a
festival	day	for	him,	xx.278.	His	arrows,	like	those	of	Artemis,	bring
sudden	and	painless	death,	iii.280,	
etc.
Ar'es
:	Son	of	Zeus,	god	of	war,	lover	of	Aphrodite,	viii.267,	
etc.
Are'te
:	Wife	of	Alkinoös,	queen	of	the	Phaiakians,	vii.54,	
etc.
Arethou'sa
:	A	spring	on	Ithaka,	xiii.408.
Are'tos
:	Son	of	Nestor,	iii.414.
Argeïphon'tes
:	“The	slayer	of	Argos,”	an	epithet	of	Hermes,	i.38;	v.43,	
etc.
Ar'gives
:	The	Greeks	who	went	to	Troy,	i.61,	etc.;	also,	the	people	of
Mykene	or	Sparta,	iii.309,	
etc.
Ar'go
:	The	ship	of	the	Argonauts,	xii.69.
Ar'gos
:	The	dog	of	Odysseus,	xvii.292.
Ar'gos
:	City	or	district	in	the	northeast	Peloponnese,	or	simply	“Greece,”
i.344,	iii.251,	
etc.
Ariad'ne
:	Daughter	of	Minos,	killed	by	Artemis.	Her	ghost	was	seen	by
Odysseus	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.321.
Arkei'sios
:	Father	of	Laertes,	xvi.118,	
etc.
Arnai'os
:	The	true	name	of	Iros,	xviii.5.
Arta'kie
:	A	spring	on	Lamos,	x.108.
Ar'temis
:	Daughter	of	Zeus	and	Leto,	sister	of	Apollo,	vi.102,	
etc.
	Her
arrows,	like	those	of	Apollo,	bring	sudden	and	painless	death,	xv.410,
etc.
Aso'pos
:	A	river	and	river	god	in	Boiotia,	father	of	Antiope,	xi.260
A'rybas
:	A	lord	of	Sidon,	father	of	Eumaios'	nurse,	xv.426.
Asphal'ion
:	Henchman	of	Menelaos,	iv.216.
As'teris
:	A	little	island	off	Ithaka,	iv.846.
Athe'ne
:	Or	Pallas	Athene,	goddess,	daughter	of	Zeus,	i.44,	
etc.
Ath'ens
:	The	famous	city	in	east-central	Greece,	iii.278.
At'las
:	Titan,	father	of	Kalypso,	i.52.
At'reus
:	Father	of	Agamemnon	and	Menelaos,	i.35,	
etc.
Atryto'ne
:	Epithet	of	Athene,	iv.762.
Auto'lykos
:	Father	of	Antikleia,	so	grandfather	of	Odysseus,	xi.85;	xix.394,
etc.
Auto'noë
:	Handmaid	of	Penelope,	xviii.182.
	
Bo'ëthoös
:	Father	of	Eteoneus,	iv.31.
Boö'tes
:	The	constellation	of	that	name,	v.272.
	
Chal'kis
:	A	place	on	the	west	coast	of	Greece,	opposite	Ithaka,	xv.295.
Charyb'dis
:	A	monster	of	the	coast	in	the	form	of	a	great	whirlpool,	xii.104,
etc.
Chi'os
:	A	large	island	off	the	coast	of	Asia	Minor,	iii.170.
Chlo'ris
:	Wife	of	Neleus	and	mother	of	Nestor,	whose	ghost	Odysseus	saw	in
the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.281.
Chro'mios
:	Son	of	Neleus	and	Chloris,	brother	of	Nestor,	xi.286.
Cir'ce
:	The	goddess	and	enchantress	of	Aiaia,	Book	x	throughout,	also
viii.448;	ix.31,	
etc.
Crete
:	Large	island,	domain	of	Idomeneus,	iii.191,	
etc.
	Pretended	home	of
Odysseus	in	various	lying	stories,	xiii.256;	xiv.199;	xix.172.
Cyclo'pes
:	A	monstrous	people	encountered	by	Odysseus	and	his	men,
ix.106,	
etc.
	In	the	singular,	the	Cyclops	means	Polyphemos,	i.69;	ii.19,
etc.
Cy'prus
:	Large	island	in	the	easternmost	Mediterranean,	iv.83,	
etc.
	
Damas'tor
:	Father	of	Agelaos,	xx.321.
Dan'aans
:	The	Greeks	who	went	to	Troy,	i.350,	
etc.
Dawn
:	Properly	Eos,	the	goddess	whose	rising	brings	the	day,	ii.1;	v.1,	
etc.
Wife	of	Tithonos,	v.1;	mother	of	the	killer	of	Antilochos	(presumably
Memnon),	iv.188;	in	love	with	Orion,	v.121;	carried	off	Kleitos,	xv.250.
Deï'phobos
:	Son	of	Priam,	husband	of	Helen	at	the	time	of	the	fall	of	Troy,
iv.276;	viii.518.
De'los
:	Island	in	the	Aigaian	Sea,	sacred	to	Apollo,	vi.162.
Deme'ter
:	Sister	of	Zeus,	who	loved	Iasion,	v.125.
Demo'dokos
:	The	blind	singer	of	the	Phaiakians,	viii.44,	
etc.
Demopto'lemos
:	Suitor	killed	by	Odysseus,	xxii.242;	266.
Deuka'lion
:	King	in	Crete,	father	of	Idomeneus,	xix.180.
Di'a
:	An	island	in	the	Aigaian,	xi.325.
Dio'kles
:	Lord	of	Pherai,	iii.488;	xv.186.
Diome'des
:	Son	of	Tydeus,	a	great	hero	of	the	
Iliad
,	iii.180.
Diony'sos
:	God	of	wine,	xxiv.75;	accuser	of	Ariadne,	xi.325.
Dme'tor
:	Son	of	Iasos	(2),	king	of	Cyprus,	xvii.443.
Dodo'na
:	Site	of	an	oracle	of	Zeus	in	northwestern	Greece,	xiv.327;	xix.296.
Do'lios
:	An	old	servant,	specially	attached	to	Penelope,	iv.735;	works	on	the
estate	with	Laertes,	xxiv.222;	father	of	Melanthios,	xvii.212;	of
Melantho,	xviii.322.
Dor'ians
:	Presumably,	the	“conquerors,”	located	by	Odysseus	in	Crete,
xix.177.
Douli'chion
:	A	large,	but	not	positively	identified,	island	in	the	domain	of
Odysseus,	i.246,	
etc.
	(In	the	
Iliad
,	it	is	in	the	domain	of	Meges.)
	
Dy'mas
:
A	Phaiakian,	father	of	Nausikaa's	best	friend,	vi.22.
	
Echene'os
:	Aged	Phaiakian	counselor,	vii.155;	xi.342.
Eche'phron
:	A	son	of	Nestor,	iii.413.
E'chetos
:	A	cruel	king	somewhere	in	western	Greece,	xviii.85;	xxi.308.
E'gypt
:	The	country,	iii.300;	iv.351,	
etc.
Eido'thea
:	Sea	nymph,	daughter	of	Proteus,	iv.365.
Eileithyi'a
:	The	goddess	of	childbirth,	xix.188.
E'latos
:	A	suitor,	killed	by	Eumaios,	xxii.267.
Elat'reus
:	A	Phaiakian,	viii.111.
E'lis
:	City	and	district	of	the	western	Peloponnese,	opposite	Ithaka,	iv.635,
etc.
Elpe'nor
:	Companion	of	Odysseus,	killed	by	accidentally	falling	from	the
roof,	x.552;	Odysseus	talked	with	his	ghost,	xi.51.
Ely'sian	Field
:	The	far	fortunate	place	where	Menelaos	is	ultimately	to	find
his	home,	iv.563.
E'nipeus
:	A	river	in	Thessaly,	loved	by	Tyro,	xi.238.
Epei'ans
:	People	of	Elis,	xiii.275,	
etc.
Epei'os
:	The	builder	of	the	Wooden	Horse,	viii.493;	xi.524.
Eper'itos
:	Name	assumed	by	Odysseus	when	he	talked	with	Laertes,
xxiv.306.
Ephial'tes
:	Son	of	Poseidon	and	Iphimedeia,	brother	of	Otos,	gigantic	child
killed	by	Apollo,	xi.308.
E'phyre
:	Place	of	unknown	location,	apparently	in	Western	Greece,	i.259;
ii.328.
Epikas'te
:	More	familiarly	known	as	Iokaste,	the	wife	and	mother	of
Oidipodes,	xi.271.
E'rebos
:	The	dark	place	of	the	dead,	x.528.
Erech'theus
:	Hero	of	Athens,	vii.81.
Erem'boi
:	An	unidentified	people	visited	by	Menelaos	during	his
wanderings,	iv.84.
Eret'meus
:	A	Phaiakian,	viii.112.
Eriphy'le
:	Wife	of	Amphiaraos,	who	caused	his	death,	xi.326.
Eryman'thos
:	A	mountain	in	the	northwest	Peloponnese,	vi.104.
Eri'nys
:	Fury,	or	a	goddess	of	curses,	xv.234.
Eteo'neus
:	Henchman	of	Menelaos,	iv.22.
Eteokre'tans
:	A	people	of	Crete,	thought	to	mean	“True-Cretans,”	xix.176.
Euan'thes
:	Father	of	Maron,	ix.197.
Euboi'a
:	A	large	island	east	of	central	Greece,	iii.175;	vii.321.
Eue'nor
:	Father	of	Leokritos,	ii.242,	
etc.
Eumai'os
:	The	noble	swineherd	of	Odysseus,	xiv.55,	
etc.
Eume'los
:	Lord	of	Pherai,	husband	of	Iphthime,	thus	brother-in-law	of
Penelope,	iv.798.
Eupei'thes
:	Father	of	Antinoös,	i.383,	etc.;	killed	by	Laertes	in	the	final
battle,	xxiv.523.
Eury'ades
:	Suitor,	killed	by	Telemachos,	xxii.267.
Eury'alos
:	A	young	Phaiakian,	rude	to	Odysseus,	viii.158,	
etc.
Eury'bates
:	The	herald	of	Odysseus,	xix.247.
Eury'damas
:	A	suitor,	xviii.297;	killed	by	Odysseus,	xxii.283.
Eury'dike
:	Daughter	of	Klymenos,	wife	of	Nestor,	iii.451.
Euryklei'a
:	The	old	nurse	of	Odysseus	and	of	Telemachos,	i.428,	
etc.
Eury'lochos
:	Second	in	command	of	Odysseus'	fleet,	x.205,	etc.;	a	relative	of
Odysseus,	though	sometimes	at	odds	with	him,	x.441.
Eury'machos
:	Son	of	Polybos	(1).	One	of	the	two	leading	suitors,	i.399;
ii.177,	etc.;	attacked	Odysseus,	xviii.394;	killed	by	Odysseus,	xxii.79.
Eury'medon
:	King	of	the	giants,	father	of	Periboia,	vii.58.
Eurymedou'sa
:	Nurse	of	Nausikaa,	vii.8.
Eu'rymos
:	Father	of	Telemos,	ix.509.
Eury'nome
:	Housekeeper	and	nurse	of	Penelope,	xvii.495,	
etc.
Eury'nomos
:	Suitor,	son	of	Aigyptios,	ii.21;	xxii.242.
Eury'pylos
:	Leader	of	the	Keteians,	killed	at	Troy	by	Neoptolemos,	xi.520.
Eury'tion
:	A	drunken	centaur,	xxi.295.
Eu'rytos
:	Father	of	Iphitos,	archer,	king	of	Oichalia,	killed	by	Apollo,
viii.224,	
etc.
	
Gai'a
:	Mother	of	Tityos,	vii.324.
Gerais'tos
:	Promontory	on	the	island	of	Euboia,	iii.178.
Gere'nian
:	Epithet	of	Nestor,	iii.68,	
etc.
Gor'gon
:	A	staring	monster,	xi.635.
Gor'tys
:	A	place	in	Crete,	iii.294.
Gra'ces
:	Properly,	the	Charites,	goddesses	of	beauty,	vi.18,	
etc.
Gy'rai
:	A	rocky	island	in	the	Aigaian	Sea,	iv.501.
	
Ha'des
:	Properly	Aïdes,	lord	of	the	dead,	iv.834;	xi.47,	
etc.
Ha'lios
:	A	son	of	Alkinoös,	viii.119.
Halither'ses
:	An	Ithakan,	gifted	in	prophecy,	favorable	to	Odysseus,	ii.157;
xxiv.451,	
etc.
He'be
:	Daughter	of	Zeus	and	Hera,	bride	of	Herakles	after	his
immortalization,	xi.604.
He'len
:	Wife	of	Menelaos,	the	cause	of	the	war,	iv.12,	
etc.
He'lios
:	The	sun	god,	i.8,	
etc.
	Odysseus'	men	slaughtered	some	of	his	cattle,
xii.260-390.
Hel'las
:	A	name	for	the	country	of	Achilleus	(as	in	the	
Iliad
)	xi.496;	more
widely,	apparently	as	“Greece”	generally,	i.344,	
etc.
Hel'lespont
:	The	strait	(Dardanelles)	by	Troy,	xxiv.82.
Hephais'tos
:	The	immortal	artificer,	iv.617,	etc.;	in	the	
Odyssey
	(not	in	the
Iliad
)	married	to	Aphrodite,	who	played	him	false	with	Ares	(according
to	the	song	of	Demodokos),	viii.266-366.
He'ra
:	Wife	of	Zeus,	queen	of	the	gods,	iv.513.
Her'akles
:	Or	Hercules,	son	of	Alkmene	and	Zeus,	xi.268;	a	great	archer,
xiii.224;	killer	of	Iphitos,	xxi.26;	immortalized	and	married	to	Hebe,
xi.601-604.
Her'mes
:	Often	called	Argeïphontes,	son	of	Zeus	and	Maia,	messenger	of
Zeus,	i.38,	
etc.
Hermi'one
:	Daughter	of	Menelaos	and	Helen,	iv.14.
Hippodamei'a
:	Handmaid	of	Penelope,	xviii.182.
Hip'potas
:	Father	of	Aiolos	(1),	x.2.
Hy'lakos
:	Father	of	Kastor	(2),	xiv.204.
Hyperei'a
:	Former	home	of	the	Phaiakians,	near	the	Cyclopes,	vi.4.
Hypere'sia
:	City	in	Achaia,	home	of	Polypheides,	xv.254.
Hyperi'on
:	(1)	Epithet	of	Helios,	i.24,	etc.;	(2)	father	of	Helios,	xii.176.
	
Iar'danos
:	River	in	Crete,	iii.292.
Ias'ion
:	Hero	beloved	by	Demeter,	v.126.
I'asos
:	(1)	Father	of	Amphion	(2),	xi.283;	(2)	father	of	Dmetor,	xvii.443.
Ido'meneus
:	Lord	of	Crete,	a	great	hero	of	the	
Iliad
,	iii.191;	xiii.259,	
etc.
Ika'rios
:	The	father	of	Penelope,	i.328,	
etc.
Ikma'lios
:	Artificer,	who	made	Penelope's	chair,	xix.57.
I'lion
:	The	city	of	Troy,	ii.18,	
etc.
I'los
:	Son	of	Mermeros,	apparently	king	of	Ephyra,	i.259.
I'no
:	Also	called	Leukothea,	daughter	of	Kadmos,	once	mortal,	now	a	sea
goddess,	v.333;	461.
Iol'kos
:	Place	in	Thessaly,	home	of	Pelias,	xi.257.
I'phikles
:	Lord	of	Phylake,	captor	of	Melampous,	xi.290.
Imphimedei'a
:	Mother	of	Otos	and	Ephialtes,	xi.305.
I'phitos
:	Son	of	Eurytos,	friend	of	the	young	Odysseus,	foully	murdered	by
Herakles,	giver	of	the	great	bow	to	Odysseus,	xxi.11-41.
Iphthi'me
:	Wife	of	Eumelos	and	sister	of	Penelope,	to	whom	she	appeared
in	a	dream,	iv.797.
I'ros
:	The	name	Arnaios	commonly	went	by;	the	beggar	who	fought	with
Odysseus,	xviii.1-107;	so	named	after	the	goddess	Iris,	who	otherwise
does	not	appear	in	the	
Odyssey
,	xviii.6.
Is'maros
:	Thracian	home	of	the	Kikonians,	ix.40.
I'thaka
:	Island	off	the	west	coast	of	Greece,	i.18,	etc.,	home	of	Odysseus;	its
position	described,	ix.21-26.
I'thakos
:	Builder	of	a	well	on	Ithaka,	xvii.207.
I'tylos
:	Son	of	Zethos	(2)	and	“the	nightingale,”	daughter	of	Pandareos
(presumably	Prokne),	killed	by	his	mother,	xix.523.
	
Ja'son
:	Master	of	the	ship	Argo,	xii.72.
	
Kadmei'ans
:	The	people	of	Thebes	(2),	xi.276.
Kad'mos
:	Founder	of	Thebes	(2),	father	of	Ino,	v.333.
Kalyp'so
:	Goddess-nymph,	daughter	of	Atlas,	i.14;	52;	befriended	and	lived
with	Odysseus,	v.14-268,	
etc.
Kassan'dra
:	Daughter	of	Priam,	captive	mistress	of	Agamemnon,	murdered
with	him,	xi.422.
Kas'tor
:	(1)	Son	of	Leda	and	Tyndareos,	brother	of	Polydeukes,	semi-
immortalized	by	Zeus,	xi.298-304;	(2)	son	of	Hylakos,	pretended	father
of	Odysseus	in	his	story	as	told	to	Eumaios,	xiv.204.
Kauko'nes
:	A	people,	presumably	near	Pylos.	Athene,	disguised	as	Mentor,
announces	that	she	will	visit	them,	iii.366.	Apparently,	therefore,	they
are	not	the	same	as	the	people	in	the	
Iliad
	mentioned	at	
Iliad
	X.429	and
XX.329.
Kephallen'ians
:	People	of	Kephallenia	or,	especially	in	Book	xxiv,	of	the
whole	community	of	islands,	xx.210;	xxiv.355;	377;	429.
Ketei'ans
:	The	people	of	Eurypylos,	xi.520.
Kiko'nians
:	The	Thracians	of	Ismaros,	raided	by	Odysseus,	ix.39-61.
Kimmer'ians
:	A	people	near	the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.14.	In	historical	times,
the	name	applies	to	a	non-Greek	people	of	the	Black	Sea	who	raided
Asia	Minor	in	the	seventh	century	
B.C
.
Klei'tos
:	Son	of	Mantios,	snatched	away	by	the	Dawn,	xv.250.
Kly'mene
:	Heroine	seen	by	Odysseus	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.326.
Kly'menos
:	Father	of	Eurydike,	iii.452.
Klytaimes'tra
:	Agamemnon's	wife,	who	took	Aigisthos	as	a	lover,	iii.265-
272;	accomplice	in	Agamemnon's	murder,	and	murdered	Kassandra,
xi.421-434.
Kly'tios
:	Father	of	Peiraios,	xv.540.
Klytone'os
:	A	son	of	Alkinoös,	viii.119.
Knos'sos
:	A	city	in	Crete,	xix.178.
Koky'tos
:	A	river	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	x.513.
Kratai'ïs
:	Mother	of	Skylla,	xii.124.
Krei'on
:	Father	of	Megara,	xi.269.
Kre'theus
:	Son	of	Aiolos	(2),	husband	of	Tyro,	father	of	Aison,	Pheres,	and
Amythaon,	xi.258,	
etc.
Kro'nos
:	Father	of	Zeus,	i.386,	
etc.
Kro'unoi
:	A	place	on	the	western	coast	of	Greece,	opposite	Ithaka,	xv.295.
Kte'sios
:	Father	of	Eumaios,	xv.414.
Ktesip'pos
:	A	violent	suitor,	who	threw	a	cow's	hoof	at	Odysseus,	xx.288-
303;	killed	by	Philoitios,	xxii.285.
Kti'mene
:	The	sister	of	Odysseus,	xv.363.
Kydo'nians
:	A	people	of	Crete,	iii.292;	xix.176.
Kylle'ne
:	Mountain	in	Arkadia,	the	home	of	Hermes,	xxiv.1.
Kythe'ra
:	Island	off	the	southern	tip	of	Greece,	ix.81.
Kytherei'a
:	Aphrodite,	the	lady	of	Kythera,	viii.288;	xviii.193.
	
Laer'kes
:	Goldsmith	in	Pylos,	iii.425.
Laer'tes
:	Son	of	Arkeisios,	father	of	Odysseus,	i.189,	
etc.
	Rejuvenated	by
Athene,	fights	in	the	last	battle,	xxiv.	513-525.
Laistry'gones
:	A	giant	cannibal	people	encountered	by	Odysseus	and	his
men,	x.80-132.
Lakedai'mon
:	The	country	of	Sparta,	domain	of	Menelaos,	iii.326,	
etc.
La'mos
:	The	city	of	the	Laistrygones,	x.81.
Lampe'tia
:	Nymph,	daughter	of	Helios	and	Neaira,	who	tended	her	father's
cattle,	xii.132;	374.
Lam'pos
:	One	of	the	Dawn's	horses,	xxiii.246.
Lao'damas
:	Favorite	son	of	Alkinoös,	vii.	170;	viii.117,	
etc.
La'pithai
:	The	people	of	Peirithoös,	xxi.297.
Le'da
:	Wife	of	Tyndareos,	mother	of	Kastor	and	Polydeukes,	xi.298.
Lem'nos
:	Island	in	the	northern	Aigaian,	favored	by	Hephaistos,	viii.283,
etc.
Leo'des
:	A	weak	and	well-meaning	suitor,	with	prophetic	skill,	xxi.144,	etc.;
killed	by	Odysseus	while	begging	for	mercy,	xxii.	310-329.
Leo'kritos
:	A	suitor,	ii.242;	killed	by	Telemachos,	xxii.294.
Les'bos
:	Island	off	Asia	Minor,	where	Odysseus	wrestled	with
Philomeleides,	iv.342,	
etc.
Le'to
:	Mother	(by	Zeus)	of	Artemis	and	Apollo,	vi.106,	etc.;	Tityos
tormented	after	death	for	assaulting	her,	xi.580.
Leuko'thea
:	Ino's	name	as	a	divinity,	v.333.
Lib'ya
:	The	Greek	name	for	Africa,	iv.85;	xiv,295.
Lotus-Eaters
:	Mysterious	people	visited	by	Odysseus	and	his	men,	ix.82-
104.
	
Mai'a
:	Mother	of	Hermes,	xiv.436,	
etc.
Mai'ra
:	Heroine	seen	by	Odysseus	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.326.
Malei'a
:	Southeastern	cape	on	the	mainland	of	Greece,	iii.288,	
etc.
Man'tios
:	Son	of	Melampous,	grandfather	of	Theoklymenos,	xv.242.
Ma'rathon
:	District	near	Athens,	favored	by	Athene	(also,	site	of	the
subsequent	battle),	vii.80.
Ma'ron
:	Priest	of	Apollo	at	Ismaros,	ix.197.
Mas'tor
:	Father	of	Halitherses,	ii.157;	xxiv.451.
Me'don
:	Herald	of	Odysseus	in	Ithaka,	loyal	to	Penelope	and	Telemachos,
iv.677,	etc.;	spared	by	Odysseus	after	the	slaughter,	xxii.361.
Megapen'thes
:	Son	of	Menelaos	and	a	slave	girl,	iv.11;	xv.100,	
etc.
Me'gara
:	Daughter	of	Kreion,	wife	of	Herakles,	xi.269.
Melam'pous
:	A	famous	soothsayer,	xi.291;	xv.256.
Mel'aneus
:	Father	of	Amphimedon,	xxiv.103.
Melan'thios
:	Son	of	Dolios,	goatherd	who	sided	with	the	suitors	and	insulted
and	kicked	Odysseus,	xvii.212,	etc.;	aided	the	suitors	in	their	battle,
xxii.135;	mutilated	by	Telemachos	and	the	herdsmen,	xxii.474.
Melan'tho
:	Daughter	of	Dolios,	favored	but	treacherous	maid	of	Penelope,
xviii.321;	xix.65.
Mem'non
:	Son	of	the	Dawn,	see	iii.112	(where,	however,	he	is	not	named);
handsomest	of	men,	xi.522.
Menela'os
:	Husband	of	Helen,	great	hero	of	the	
Iliad
,	iv.2,	
etc.
Menoi'tios
:	Father	of	Patroklos,	xxiv.77.
Men'tes
:	Name	assumed	by	Athene	on	her	first	visit	to	Telemachos,	i.105,
etc.
Men'tor
:	Ithakan	friend	of	Odysseus,	to	whom	he	entrusted	his	household
when	he	went	to	Troy,	ii.225,	etc.;	frequently	impersonated	by	Athene,
ii.268;	xxii.206;	xxiv.548,	
etc.
Mer'meros
:	Father	of	Ilos,	i.259.
Mesaul'ios
:	Thrall	of	Eumaios,	xiv.449.
Messe'ne
:	Territory	in	southwestern	Greece,	xxi.15.
Mi'mas
:	A	mountainous	promontory	of	Asia	Minor,	opposite	Chios,	iii.172.
Mi'nos
:	Son	of	Zeus	and	king	of	Crete,	xix.178;	judge	in	the	land	of	the
dead,	xi.568;	father	of	Ariadne,	xi.322.
Min'yan
:	Name	applied	to	Orchomenos,	xi.284.
Mou'lios
:	Doulichian	herald	attached	to	Amphinomos,	xviii.423.
Myke'ne
:	(1)	a	fabulous	heroine	of	the	past,	ii.120;	(2)	the	city	of
Agamemnon,	iii.304.
Myr'midons
:	The	people	of	Achilleus	and	Neoptolemos,	iii.188,	
etc.
	
Nau'bolos
:	Father	of	Euryalos,	viii.115.
Nausi'kaa
:	Daughter	of	Alkinoös	and	Arete,	who	befriended	Odysseus,
vi.17,	
etc.
Nausi'thoös
:	Founder	of	the	Phaiakian	settlement	on	Scheria,	vi.7;	son	of
Poseidon	and	father	of	Rhexenor	and	Alkinoös,	vii.	56-63.
Nau'teus
:	A	Phaiakian,	viii.112.
Neai'ra
:	Wife	of	Helios,	mother	of	Phaethousa	and	Lampetia,	xii.133.
Ne'leus
:	Father	of	Nestor,	former	king	in	Pylos,	iii.409,	
etc.
Neopto'lemos
:	Son	of	Achilleus,	xi.506.
Ne'rikos
:	Place	(on	Leukas)	once	taken	by	Laertes,	xxiv.378.
Ne'ritos
:	(1)	Mountain	of	Ithaka,	xiii.351;	(2)	builder	of	a	well	on	Ithaka,
xvii.207.
Nes'tor
:	The	old	hero	of	the	
Iliad
,	king	in	Pylos,	i.284;	iii.17,	
etc.
Ni'sos
:	King	in	Doulichion,	father	of	Amphinomos,	xviii.127,	
etc.
Noë'mon
:	Ithakan	friend	of	Telemachos,	who	lent	him	his	ship,	ii.386;
iv.630.
	
Ocean
:	Or	Oke'anos,	the	waters	surrounding	the	world	and	the	god	of	those
waters,	iv.567;	x.139;	xi.639,	
etc.
Odys'seus
:	The	hero,	first	mentioned	by	name,	i.21;	son	of	Laertes,	iv.555,
etc.;	and	of	Antikleia,	xi.85.
Ogy'gia
:	Kalypso's	island,	i.85,	
etc.
Oidi'podes
:	Or	Oedipus,	hero	of	Thebes	(1),	xi.271	(in	Homer,	strictly,
Oidipodes).
Oï'kles
:	Father	of	Amphiaraos,	xv.243.
Oi'nops
:	Father	of	Leodes,	xxi.144.
Oky'alos
:	A	Phaiakian,	viii.111.
Olym'pos
:	The	home	of	the	gods,	i.102,	etc.;	described,	vi.42.
One'tor
:	Father	of	Phrontis,	iii.282.
Ops
:	Father	of	Eurykleia,	i.429.
Orcho'menos
:	Minyan	city	in	Boiotia,	xi.284.
Ores'tes
:	The	son	of	Agamemnon,	who	avenged	him,	i.30;	298;	iii.306,	
etc.
Ori'on
:	A	hero	loved	by	the	Dawn,	killed	by	Artemis,	v.121;	his	ghost	seen
by	Odysseus	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.572;	as	a	constellation,	v.274.
Or'menos
:	Father	of	Ktesios,	xv.414.
Orsi'lochos
:	Son	of	Idomeneus,	in	a	story	told	by	Odysseus,	xiii.260.
Orti'lochos
:	Father	of	Diokles,	iii.489;	host	to	Odysseus	in	Messene,	xxi.16.
Orty'gia
:	A	place	of	uncertain	location,	where	Artemis	killed	Orion,	v.123;	a
place	(the	same?)	“where	the	sun	makes	his	turnings,”	near	the	Homeric
Syria,	xv.404.
Os'sa
:	A	mountain	in	Thessaly,	xi.315.
O'tos
:	Son	of	Poseidon	and	Iphimedeia,	brother	of	Ephialtes,	gigantic	child
killed	by	Apollo,	xi.308.
	
Paië'on
:	The	god	of	medicine,	iv.232.
Pal'las
:	Epithet	of	Athene,	i.125,	
etc.
Pandar'eos
:	Father	of	“the	nightingale,”	xix.518;	his	daughters	carried
away	by	the	stormwinds,	xx.66.
Pan'opeus
:	A	city	in	Phokis,	xi.581.
Paph'os
:	A	place	on	Cyprus,	favored	by	Aphrodite,	viii.362.
Parnas'sos
:	A	great	mountain	in	central	Greece,	xix.394,	
etc.
Patrok'los
:	Companion	of	Achilleus,	a	great	hero	of	the	
Iliad
,	iii.110,	
etc.
Peirai'os
:	Man	of	Ithaka,	friend	and	companion	of	Telemachos,	xv.540,	
etc.
Peiri'thoös
:	Hero	of	former	times,	friend	of	Theseus,	xi.631;	king	of	the
Lapiths,	who	punished	Eurytion,	xxi.296.
Peisan'dros
:	Son	of	Polyktor,	a	suitor,	xviii.299;	killed	by	Philoitios,	xxii.268.
Peise'nor
:	(1)	Herald	in	Ithaka,	ii.37;	(2)	father	of	Ops,	grandfather	of
Eurykleia,	i.429,	
etc.
Peisis'tratos
:	Son	of	Nestor,	greets	Telemachos	and	Athene,	iii.36;
accompanies	Telemachos	to	Sparta,	iii.482,	
etc.
Pelas'gians
:	A	mysterious	people,	variously	located	in	the	
Iliad
;	in	the
Odyssey
,	they	are	found	in	Crete,	xix.177.
Pe'leus:	Father	of	Achilleus,	v.310,	
etc.
Pe'lias
:	Son	of	Tyro	and	Poseidon,	king	in	Iolkos,	xi.256.
Pe'lion
:	A	mountain	in	Thessaly,	xi.316.
Pene'lope
:	Daughter	of	Ikarios,	wife	of	Odysseus,	i.223,	
etc.
Periboi'a
:	Daughter	of	Eurymedon,	mother,	by	Poseidon,	of	Nausithoös,
vii.57.
Perikly'menos
:	Son	of	Neleus	and	Chloris,	brother	of	Nestor,	xi.286.
Perime'des
:	A	companion	of	Odysseus,	xi.23;	
etc.
Pe'ro
:	Daughter	of	Neleus	and	Chloris,	a	great	beauty,	xi.287.
Per'se
:	Nymph,	daughter	of	Ocean,	x.139.
Perse'phone
:	Goddess,	wife	of	Hades,	queen	over	the	dead,	x.491,	xi.47,	
etc.
Per'seus
:	Son	of	Nestor,	iii.414	(not	to	be	confused	with	the	gorgon	slayer).
Pha'ethon
:	One	of	the	Dawn's	horses,	xxiii.246.
Phaethou'sa
:	Nymph,	daughter	of	Helios	and	Neaira,	who	tended	her
father's	cattle,	xii.132.
Phaia'kians
:	The	people	of	Alkinoös,	v.35,	
etc.
Phai'dimos
:	King	of	the	Sidonians,	friend	of	Menelaos,	iv.617.
Phaid'ra
:	Heroine	seen	by	Odysseus	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.321.
Phais'tos
:	City	in	Crete,	iii.296.
Pha'ros
:	Island	off	Egypt	where	Menelaos	captured	Proteus,	iv.355.
Phe'ai
:	A	place	on	the	mainland	opposite	Ithaka,	xv.297.
Phei'don
:	King	of	Thesprotia,	xiv.316.
Phe'mios
:	Son	of	Terpias,	the	singer	who	sang	for	the	suitors,	i.154,	etc.;	his
life	spared	by	Odysseus,	xxii.331.
Phe'rai
:	(1)	A	place	in	Thessaly,	the	home	of	Eumelos,	iv.	798;	(2)	a	place
between	Pylos	and	Sparta,	the	home	of	Diokles,	iii.488.
Phe'res
:	Son	of	Kretheus	and	Tyro,	xi.259.
Philoi'tios
:	The	oxherd	who	remained	loyal	to	Odysseus,	xx.185,	
etc.
Philokte'tes
:	A	great	hero	and	master	bowman	of	the	Trojan	War,	iii.190;
viii.219.
Philomele'ïdes
:	A	wrestler	of	Lesbos,	thrown	by	Odysseus,	iv.343.
Phoeni'cia,	Phoeni'cians
:	A	nation	and	its	people,	noted	as	seafarers,
traders,	and	slave	traders,	living	on	the	Syrian	coast,	iv.83;	xiv.288,	
etc.
Phoi'bos
:	Epithet	of	Apollo,	iii.279,	
etc.
Phor'kys
:	An	old	man	of	the	sea,	xiii.345;	father	of	Thoö'sa,	i.72.
Phron'ios
:	Father	of	Noëmon,	ii.386,	
etc.
Phron'tis
:	Son	of	Onetor,	the	steersman	of	Menelaos,	iii.282.
Phthi'a
:	The	home	of	Achilleus,	xi.496.
Phy'lake
:	The	home	of	Iphikles,	xi.	290;	xv.236.
Phy'lakos
:	A	hero,	possibly	the	same	person	as	Iphikles,	who	imprisoned
Melampous,	xv.231.
Phy'lo
:	Handmaid	of	Helen,	iv.125.
Pie'ria
:	Mountainous	district	near	Mount	Olympos,	v.50.
Plei'ades
:	The	constellation,	v.272.
Poi'as
:	Father	of	Philoktetes,	iii.190.
Poli'tes
:	A	companion	of	Odysseus,	x.224.
Pol'ybos
:	(1)	Father	of	Eurymachos,	i.399;	(2)	man	of	Egyptian	Thebes,
visited	by	Menelaos	and	Helen,	iv.126;	(3)	craftsman,	who	made	a	ball
used	by	the	Phaiakians,	viii.373;	(4)	suitor,	xxii.243;	killed	by	Eumaios,
xxii.284.
Polydam'na
:	Egyptian	lady,	wife	of	Thon,	who	gave	Helen	a	tranquilizing
drug,	iv.228.
Polydeu'kes
:	Son	of	Leda	and	Tyndareos,	brother	of	Kastor	(1),	semi-
immortalized	by	Zeus,	xi.298-304.
Polykas'te
:	Youngest	daughter	of	Nestor,	who	gave	Telemachos	a	bath,
iii.464.
Polyk'tor
:	(1)	Builder	of	a	well	on	Ithaka,	xvii.207;	(2)	father	of	Peisandros,
xviii.299.
Polyne'os
:	Father	of	Amphialos,	viii.114.
Polype'mon
:	Father	of	Apheidas,	xxiv.305.
Polyphei'des
:	Son	of	Mantios,	a	prophet,	father	of	Theoklymenos,	xv.249-
256.
Polyphe'mos
:	Greatest	of	the	Cyclopes,	son	of	Poseidon,	blinded	by
Odysseus,	i.70;	ix.403,	
etc.
Polyther'ses
:	Father	of	Ktesippos,	xxii.287.
Pon'teus
:	A	Phaiakian,	viii.113.
Ponto'noös
:	Herald	of	Alkinoös,	vii.182,	
etc.
Posei'don
:	Brother	of	Zeus,	lord	of	the	sea,	enemy	of	Odysseus,	i.20,	etc.;
father	of	Polyphemos,	i.68-73,	
etc.
Pramnei'an	wine
:	A	wine	used	medicinally,	origin	unknown,	x.235.
Pri'am
:	King	of	Troy,	iii.107,	
etc.
Prok'ris
:	Heroine	seen	by	Odysseus	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.321.
Pro'reus
:	A	Phaiakian,	viii.113.
Pro'teus
:	The	old	man	of	the	sea,	iv.365-570.
Prym'neus:	A	Phaiakian,	i.112.
Psy'rios
:	Island	off	Chios,	iii.171.
Py'los
:	The	city	of	Nestor	on	the	southwest	coast	of	Greece,	i.93,	
etc.
Pyriphle'gethon
:	A	river	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	x.513.
Py'tho
:	Apollo's	sanctuary	on	the	slopes	of	Mount	Parnassos,	viii.80;	xi.581.
	
Rhadaman'thys
:	Presumably	king	in	the	Elysian	Field,	iv.564.
Rhei'thron
:	Harbor	on	Ithaka,	i.186.
Rhexe'nor
:	Son	of	Nausithoös,	father	of	Arete,	vii.63.
Roving	Rocks
:	Located	near	the	Sirens,	xii.61;	xxiii.327.
	
Salmo'neus
:	Father	of	Tyro,	xi.236.
Sam'e	or	Samos
:	Large	island	(later	Kephallenia),	next	to	Ithaka	and	in	the
domain	of	Odysseus,	i.246,	
etc.
Sche'ria
:	The	land	of	the	Phaiakians,	v.34,	
etc.
Sicilian
:	Used	of	a	people	referred	to	as	dealing	in	slaves,	xx.383;
provenence	of	Laertes'	slave	woman,	xxiv.211,	
etc.
	(actually,	the	word	is
Si'kelos,	which	in	Greek	elsewhere	refers	to	a	native	people	in	Sicily,	or
Sike'lia).
Si'don,	Sidon'ia
:	City	of	the	Phoenicians,	xiii.286,	
etc.
Sika'nia
:	A	place	referred	to	by	Odysseus,	perhaps	to	be	identified	with
Sicily,	xxiv.307.
Sin'tians
:	Friends	of	Hephaistos	in	Lemnos,	who	spoke	an	uncouth
language,	viii.294.
Si'rens
:	Singing,	dangerous	creatures	of	the	sea,	xii.39,	
etc.
Sis'yphos
:	Hero	tormented	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	condemned	to	roll	a
stone	forever	uphill,	xi.593.
Skyl'la
:	A	man-eating	monster	who	preyed	on	Odysseus'	men,	xii.85;	245,
etc.
Sky'ros
:	Island	from	which	Odysseus	brought	Neoptolemos	to	Troy,	xi.509.
So'lymoi
:	A	people	visited	by	Poseidon,	v.283.
Sou'nion
:	A	sea	cape	of	Attika,	near	Athens,	iii.278.
Spar'ta
:	The	city	of	Menelaos,	i.93,	
etc.
Stra'tios
:	A	son	of	Nestor,	iii.413.
Styx
:	The	river	or	waterfall	by	which	the	gods	swear,	v.185;	located	in	the
land	of	the	dead,	x.514.
Sy'ria
:	An	island	of	uncertain	location,	the	original	home	of	Eumaios,
xv.403.
	
Tan'talos
:	Hero	tormented	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.582.
Taph'ians
:	A	people,	not	certainly	located,	on	or	near	the	western	coast	of
Greece,	i.105;	xiv.452.
Taÿ'getos
:	A	mountain	range	in	Lakedaimon,	vi.103.
Teire'sias
:	Theban	seer,	who	retained	his	powers	even	in	the	land	of	the
dead,	x.492,	etc.;	consulted	by	Odysseus	and	foretells	his	future,	xi.90-
137.
Tek'ton
:	Father	of	Polyneos,	viii.114.
Te'lamon
:	The	father	of	Aias	(1),	xi.553.
Tele'machos
:	The	thoughtful	son	of	Odysseus	and	Penelope,	i.113,	
etc.
Te'lemos
:	Prophet	of	the	Cyclopes,	ix.509.
Te'lephos
:	Father	of	Eurypylos,	xi.519.
Tele'pylos
:	City	of	the	Laistrygones,	x.82.
Te'mese
:	Place	alleged	to	be	her	destination	by	Athene	disguised	as	Mentes,
i.184.
Te'nedos
:	Island	off	Asia	Minor,	near	Troy,	iii.159.
Ter'pias
:	Father	of	Phemios,	xxii.330	(but	the	form	of	his	name	is
uncertain).
Thebes
:	(1)	City	of	Egypt,	iv.127;	(2)	city	of	the	Kadmeians	in	Boiotia,
xv.247,	
etc.
The'mis
:	Goddess	of	what	is	right	and	proper,	who	supervises	the
assemblies	of	men,	ii.68.
Theokly'menos
:	A	man	of	prophetic	family,	fugitive	from	Argos,	befriended
by	Telemachos,	xv.223,	
etc.
	(first	named,	xv.256).
The'seus
:	Great	hero	of	Athens,	who	carried	Ariadne	away	from	Crete,
xi.322,	
etc.
Thespro'tians
:	A	people	of	the	northwest	mainland,	xiv.315,	
etc.
The'tis
:	Nereid,	married	to	Peleus,	mother	of	Achilleus,	xxiv.91.
Tho'as
:	Son	of	Andraimon,	hero	at	Troy,	xiv.499.
Thon
:	Egyptian,	husband	of	Polydamna,	iv.228.
Tho'ön
:	A	Phaiakian,	viii.113.
Thoö'sa
:	A	nymph,	daughter	of	Phorkys,	mother	of	Polyphemos,	i.71.
Thrace
:	Territory	north	of	Greece,	favored	home	of	Ares,	viii.361.
Thrsyme'des
:	Son	of	Nestor,	iii.39,	
etc.
Thrina'kia
:	The	island	of	Helios,	where	his	sacred	cattle	were	pastured,
xi.107;	xii.127,	
etc.
Thyes'tes
:	Father	of	Aigisthos,	iv.517.
Titho'nos
:	The	husband	of	the	Dawn,	v.1.
Ti'tyos
:	A	hero	tormented	in	the	land	of	the	dead,	xi.576;	mentioned,	vii.324.
Tritogenei'a
:	A	name	for	Athene,	iii,	378.
Tro'jans
:	The	people	of	Troy,	i.237,	
etc.
Troy
:	The	domain	of	Priam,	whose	city	was	Ilion,	i.2,	
etc.
Ty'deus
:	Father	of	Diomedes,	iii.167,	
etc.
Tynda'reos
:	Father	of	Kastor	and	Polydeukes,	xi.298;	of	Klytaimestra,
xxiv.199.
Ty'ro
:	A	fabulous	queen,	ii.120;	her	ghost	talked	with	Odysseus	in	the	land
of	the	dead,	xi.235.
	
Zakyn'thos
:	Large	island,	part	of	the	domain	of	Odysseus,	i.246,	
etc.
Ze'thos
:	(1)	Son	of	Antiope,	and	builder,	with	his	brother	Amphion,	of
Thebes,	xi.262;	(2)	father	of	Itylos,	xix.523.
Zeus
:	Son	of	Kronos,	most	powerful	of	the	gods,	i.10,	
etc.
About	the	Author
Richmond	Lattimore
	was	born	in	1906.	He	was	considered	one	of	the	leading
translators	of	Greek	classical	literature.	He	died	in	1984.
Visit	www.AuthorTracker.com	for	exclusive	information	on	your	favorite
HarperCollins	author.
Praise
	for	Richmond	Lattimore’s	translation	of	
The	Odyssey	of
Homer
“In	this	
Odyssey
	Professor	Lattimore	has	achieved	his	
chef-d’oeuvre
	as	a
translator.	Studied	in	retrospect,	much	of	his	previous	work	takes	on	the
appearance,	technically	speaking,	of	prolegomena	to	this	dazzling	and	well-nigh
flawless	performance…
“In	the	
Odyssey
	he	has	found	the	ideal	poem	both	for	himself	and	for	his
audience;	and	he	has	come	to	it	at	the	very	height	of	his	powers….	Here	is	a
master	in	perfect	control	of	his	medium.	The	apparent	ease	with	which	he
surmounts	every	problem,	the	perfect	balance	struck	and	maintained	between
vivid,	fast-moving	narrative	and	epic	formality,	the	rhythmic	subtleties,	the
freshness	and	vigour	of	language	displayed	from	first	page	to	last—all	these
make	his	
Odyssey
	a	landmark	in	the	history	of	modern	translation….
“He	has,	in	fact,	come	about	as	near	as	any	man	could	to	conveying,	in
English,	the	utterly	alien	movement	and	structure	of	Homer’s	poetry….
“It	would	be	a	crime	to	underestimate	the	miraculous	and	self-effacing
artistry	with	which	Professor	Lattimore	has	reanimated	Homer	for	this
generation,	and	perhaps	for	other	generations	to	come.”
—
The	Times
	[London]	
Literary	Supplement
	
“The	many	admirers	of	Richmond	Lattimore’s	
Iliad
	will	not	be	disappointed
in	his	
Odyssey
.	His	complete	Homer	is	indeed	a	splendid	achievement,	and	I
shall	be	very	far	from	being	alone	in	regarding	it	as	much	the	best	translation
there	is	of	a	great,	perhaps	the	greatest,	poem.”
—Rex	Warner,	
New	York	Times	Book	Review
	
“Richmond	Lattimore’s	translation	of	Homer’s	
Odyssey
	is	the	most	eloquent,
persuasive	and	imaginative	I	have	seen.	It	reads	as	if	the	poem	had	originally
been	written	in	English.”
—Paul	Engle
	
“Richmond	Lattimore’s…
Odyssey
	is	his	masterpiece.	It	has	the	accuracy	that
too	many	translators	take	to	be	beneath	themselves;	the	images	are	Homer’s
own;	and	Lattimore	does	not	permit	himself	flights	of	his	own	fancy.”
—Walter	Kaufman
Credits
Cover	design	©	1999	by	Marc	Cohen
Cover	painting	courtesy	of	The	New	York	Public	Library	Picture	Collection
Copyright
THE	ODYSSEY	OF	HOMER
.	Copyright	©	1965,	1967	by	Richard	Lattimore.	All
rights	reserved	under	International	and	Pan-American	Copyright	Conventions.
By	payment	of	the	required	fees,	you	have	been	granted	the	non-exclusive,	non-
transferable	right	to	access	and	read	the	text	of	this	e-book	on-screen.	No	part	of
this	text	may	be	reproduced,	transmitted,	down-loaded,	decompiled,	reverse
engineered,	or	stored	in	or	introduced	into	any	information	storage	and	retrieval
system,	in	any	form	or	by	any	means,	whether	electronic	or	mechanical,	now
known	or	hereinafter	invented,	without	the	express	written	permission	of
HarperCollins	e-books.
Adobe	Digital	Edition	October	2009	ISBN	978-0-06-176020-4
10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1
About	the	Publisher
Australia
	HarperCollins	Publishers	(Australia)	Pty.	Ltd.
25	Ryde	Road	(PO	Box	321)
Pymble,	NSW	2073,	Australia	http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au	
Canada
HarperCollins	Publishers	Ltd.
55	Avenue	Road,	Suite	2900
Toronto,	ON,	M5R,	3L2,	Canada	http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca	
New
Zealand
	HarperCollinsPublishers	(New	Zealand)	Limited	P.O.	Box	1
Auckland,	New	Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz	
United	Kingdom
	HarperCollins	Publishers	Ltd.
77-85	Fulham	Palace	Road
London,	W6	8JB,	UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk	
United	States
	HarperCollins	Publishers
Inc.
10	East	53rd	Street
New	York,	NY	10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com
1
	It	may	seem	unreasonable	to	distinguish	the	Great	Wanderings	(Troy	to
Kalypso's	island)	from	the	Homecoming	(Kalypso's	island	to	Ithaka).	The	reason
for	the	distinction	is	Homer's	way	of	recounting	these	two	stages.	The	Great
Wanderings	are	told	by	Odysseus	in	the	first	person;	the	Homecoming	by	the
poet	in	his	own	person.	This	makes	a	great	difference.	For	instance,	when
Odysseus	is	made	to	report	divine	intervention	unseen	by	him,	he	has	to	find	a
plausible	explanation	(xii.389-390);	when	the	poet	tells	the	story	in	his	own
person,	he	can	do	as	he	pleases.	Thus	the	change	of	technique,	if	nothing	else,
puts	the	two	stages	of	wandering	on	different	levels.
2
	See	D.	L.	Page,	
The	Homeric	Odyssey
	(Oxford,	1955),	p.	53;	for	a	contrary
view,	G.	S.	Kirk,	
The	Songs	of	Homer
	(Cambridge,	1962),	pp.	358-360.
3
	I	believe	in	one	poet.	There	may	have	been	more.	Having	said	so	much,	I
shall	henceforth	speak	of	“the	poet.”	There	may,	indeed	there	must,	be
interpolated	lines	and	passages.	I	do	not	know	which	ones	they	are.
4
	By	the	
Nostoi
	I	mean,	not	the	post-Homeric	poem	called	
Nostoi
	or	returns,
but	the	underlying	material,	traces	of	which	are	to	be	found	in	the	
Odyssey
	itself.
5
	Menelaos	speaks	in	the	same	vein,	iv.332-345.
6
	iii.180-192.	It	is	interesting	that	for	all	these	heroes,	except	Nestor,	later
variants	had	them	either	not	reach	home	at	all	(Neoptolemos)	or	else	wander
after	their	homecomings.	Both	Diomedes	and	Idomeneus	barely	escaped	the	fate
of	Agamemnon.	For	Neoptolemos,	see	Pindar,	
Sixth	Paean
;	for	Idomeneus,	see
the	late	compilation	of	Apollodorus,	edited	and	translated	by	J.	A.	Frazer
(London	and	Cambridge,	Mass.,	1921),	vol.	ii,	p.	249,	and	for	Philoctetes,	p.
257.	For	Diomedes,	see	the	material	in	H.	J.	Rose,	
A	Handbook	of	Greek
Mythology
	(New	York,	1959),	p.	237.
7
	According	to	Nestor,	Odysseus	set	off	in	his	company,	but	then	turned	back
with	some	others	(who?	how	many?)	to	rejoin	Agamemnon	(iii.162-164).
Odysseus	says	nothing	about	this;	in	his	own	story	he	simply	sets	off	from	Ilion
by	himself,	with	his	own	contingent.	There	is	no	outright	contradiction;	there	is
certainly	a	gap.
8
	Hephaistos	in	the	
Iliad
	also	has	automatons;	see	
Iliad
	XVIII.	372-377;	417-
420.	But	Hephaistos	is	a	god,	and	the	Phaiakians	are	mortal	men.
9
	For	the	Cyclopes,	see	Hesiod,	
Theogony
,	139-146;	see	further	the	brief	and
clear	account	of	Rose,	
op.	cit
.,	p.	22.
10
	Conveniently	summarized	by	Frazer	in	an	appendix	to	his	translation	of
Apollodorus	(cited	above,	note	6),	vol.	ii,	pp.	404-455.
11
	We	may	instance	the	wraths,	against	Odysseus	or	other	Achaian	heroes,	of
Helios,	i.9;	xii.376;	of	Zeus	and	Helios,	xix.276;	of	Zeus,	iii.132,	152,	160,	288;
ix.38,	552-555;	xii.415;	of	Athene,	i.327;	iii.135;	iv.502;	v.108.
12
	See	Kirk,	
op.	cit
.,	pp.	41-43.
13
	See	W.	W.	Hyde,	
Ancient	Greek	Mariners
	(New	York,	1947),	pp.	72-96.
This	is	an	excellent	concise	account	of	identifications,	ancient	and	modern,	made
for	sites	and	landmarks	in	the	
Odyssey
.	It	needs,	however,	to	be	brought	up	to
date.
14
	For	Sicily,	see	Thucydides	vi.2.1;	for	Korkyra,	i.25.4.
15
	See	Baedeker's	
Southern	Italy
	(1912),	p.	410.
16
	See	Baedeker's	
Greece
	(1909),	p.	262.
17
	See	J.	Boardman,	
The	Greeks	Overseas
	(London,	1964),	pp.	179-181.
18
	See	the	chapter	by	F.	H.	Stubbings,	in	Wace	and	Stubbings,	
Companion	to
Homer
	(London	and	New	York,	1962),	pp.	398-421.
19
	“You	will	find	where	Odysseus	wandered,”	said	the	Alexandrian
geographer	Eratosthenes,	“when	you	find	the	cobbler	who	stitched	the	bag	of	the
winds.”	See	Strabo,	
Geography
	i.2.15.
20
	For	a	recent	statement	and	defense	of	this	view,	see	G.	deF.	Lord,	
Homeric
Renaissance
	(New	Haven,	1956).
21
	See,	for	one	instance	out	of	many,	xxii.413-416.
22
	See	Page,	
op.	cit
.,	pp.	101-130	and,	in	particular	pp.	112-114.
23
	See,	for	instance,	Kirk,	
op.	cit
.,	p.	96.
24
	For	a	contrary	view	see,	for	instance,	D.	B.	Monro,	
Homer's	Odyssey
(Oxford,	1901),	vol.	2,	pp.	290-291.	Monro	comments	on	the	“marked	falling-off
in	the	character	of	the	chief	actor.”
25
	This	is	the	view	of	Page,	
op.	cit
.,	pp.	158-159.
26
	Contrast	the	story	told	by	Odysseus	to	Eumaios	about	warriors	on	night
picket	duty	before	Troy,	xiv.462-502.	The	chilliness	of	the	task	is	emphasized.
27
	On	this	subject	see	Kirk,	
op.	cit
.,	pp.	293-297.
28
	The	words	of	Hektor	to	Andromache,	
Iliad
	VI.490-493	are	repeated	twice
in	the	
Odyssey
	(i.356-359;	xxi.	350-353),	and	the	last	line	and	a	half	at	xi.352-
353;	but	the	“fighting”	of	the	
Iliad
	passage	is	changed	each	time.
First Citizen:
Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.

All:
Speak, speak.

First Citizen:
You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?

All:
Resolved. resolved.

First Citizen:
First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people.

All:
We know't, we know't.

First Citizen:
Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price.
Is't a verdict?

All:
No more talking on't; let it be done: away, away!

Second Citizen:
One word, good citizens.

First Citizen:
We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.
What authority surfeits on would relieve us: if they
would yield us but the superfluity, while it were
wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely;
but they think we are too dear: the leanness that
afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an
inventory to particularise their abundance; our
sufferance is a gain to them Let us revenge this with
our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I
speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.

Second Citizen:
Would you proceed especially against Caius Marcius?

All:
Against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.

Second Citizen:
Consider you what services he has done for his country?

First Citizen:
Very well; and could be content to give him good
report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.

Second Citizen:
Nay, but speak not maliciously.

First Citizen:
I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did
it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be
content to say it was for his country he did it to
please his mother and to be partly proud; which he
is, even till the altitude of his virtue.

Second Citizen:
What he cannot help in his nature, you account a
vice in him. You must in no way say he is covetous.

First Citizen:
If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations;
he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.
What shouts are these? The other side o' the city
is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol!

All:
Come, come.

First Citizen:
Soft! who comes here?

Second Citizen:
Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always loved
the people.

First Citizen:
He's one honest enough: would all the rest were so!

MENENIUS:
What work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go you
With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.

First Citizen:
Our business is not unknown to the senate; they have
had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do,
which now we'll show 'em in deeds. They say poor
suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we
have strong arms too.

MENENIUS:
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours,
Will you undo yourselves?

First Citizen:
We cannot, sir, we are undone already.

MENENIUS:
I tell you, friends, most charitable care
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander
The helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies.

First Citizen:
Care for us! True, indeed! They ne'er cared for us
yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses
crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to
support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act
established against the rich, and provide more
piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain
the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and
there's all the love they bear us.

MENENIUS:
Either you must
Confess yourselves wondrous malicious,
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it;
But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To stale 't a little more.

First Citizen:
Well, I'll hear it, sir: yet you must not think to
fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't please
you, deliver.

MENENIUS:
There was a time when all the body's members
Rebell'd against the belly, thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
I' the midst o' the body, idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answer'd--

First Citizen:
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?

MENENIUS:
Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus--
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak--it tauntingly replied
To the discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt; even so most fitly
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you.

First Citizen:
Your belly's answer? What!
The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter.
With other muniments and petty helps
In this our fabric, if that they--

MENENIUS:
What then?
'Fore me, this fellow speaks! What then? what then?

First Citizen:
Should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd,
Who is the sink o' the body,--

MENENIUS:
Well, what then?

First Citizen:
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?

MENENIUS:
I will tell you
If you'll bestow a small--of what you have little--
Patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.

First Citizen:
Ye're long about it.

MENENIUS:
Note me this, good friend;
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd:
'True is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he,
'That I receive the general food at first,
Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
Because I am the store-house and the shop
Of the whole body: but, if you do remember,
I send it through the rivers of your blood,
Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain;
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live: and though that all at once,
You, my good friends,'--this says the belly, mark me,--

First Citizen:
Ay, sir; well, well.

MENENIUS:
'Though all at once cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flour of all,
And leave me but the bran.' What say you to't?

First Citizen:
It was an answer: how apply you this?

MENENIUS:
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members; for examine
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o' the common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
You, the great toe of this assembly?

First Citizen:
I the great toe! why the great toe?

MENENIUS:
For that, being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest,
Of this most wise rebellion, thou go'st foremost:
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead'st first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs:
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
The one side must have bale.
Hail, noble Marcius!

MARCIUS:
Thanks. What's the matter, you dissentious rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourselves scabs?

First Citizen:
We have ever your good word.

MARCIUS:
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
That like nor peace nor war? the one affrights you,
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
To make him worthy whose offence subdues him
And curse that justice did it.
Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate; and your affections are
A sick man's appetite, who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favours swims with fins of lead
And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust Ye?
With every minute you do change a mind,
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another? What's their seeking?

MENENIUS:
For corn at their own rates; whereof, they say,
The city is well stored.

MARCIUS:
Hang 'em! They say!
They'll sit by the fire, and presume to know
What's done i' the Capitol; who's like to rise,
Who thrives and who declines; side factions
and give out
Conjectural marriages; making parties strong
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's
grain enough!
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth,
And let me use my sword, I'll make a quarry
With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high
As I could pick my lance.

MENENIUS:
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you,
What says the other troop?

MARCIUS:
They are dissolved: hang 'em!
They said they were an-hungry; sigh'd forth proverbs,
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat,
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not
Corn for the rich men only: with these shreds
They vented their complainings; which being answer'd,
And a petition granted them, a strange one--
To break the heart of generosity,
And make bold power look pale--they threw their caps
As they would hang them on the horns o' the moon,
Shouting their emulation.

MENENIUS:
What is granted them?

MARCIUS:
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Of their own choice: one's Junius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not--'Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroof'd the city,
Ere so prevail'd with me: it will in time
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
For insurrection's arguing.

MENENIUS:
This is strange.

MARCIUS:
Go, get you home, you fragments!

Messenger:
Where's Caius Marcius?

MARCIUS:
Here: what's the matter?

Messenger:
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.

MARCIUS:
I am glad on 't: then we shall ha' means to vent
Our musty superfluity. See, our best elders.

First Senator:
Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us;
The Volsces are in arms.

MARCIUS:
They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't.
I sin in envying his nobility,
And were I any thing but what I am,
I would wish me only he.

COMINIUS:
You have fought together.

MARCIUS:
Were half to half the world by the ears and he.
Upon my party, I'ld revolt to make
Only my wars with him: he is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.

First Senator:
Then, worthy Marcius,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.

COMINIUS:
It is your former promise.

MARCIUS:
Sir, it is;
And I am constant. Titus Lartius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.
What, art thou stiff? stand'st out?

TITUS:
No, Caius Marcius;
I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other,
Ere stay behind this business.

MENENIUS:
O, true-bred!

First Senator:
Your company to the Capitol; where, I know,
Our greatest friends attend us.

TITUS:

COMINIUS:
Noble Marcius!

First Senator:

MARCIUS:
Nay, let them follow:
The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither
To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutiners,
Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.

SICINIUS:
Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?

BRUTUS:
He has no equal.

SICINIUS:
When we were chosen tribunes for the people,--

BRUTUS:
Mark'd you his lip and eyes?

SICINIUS:
Nay. but his taunts.

BRUTUS:
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.

SICINIUS:
Be-mock the modest moon.

BRUTUS:
The present wars devour him: he is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.

SICINIUS:
Such a nature,
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
Which he treads on at noon: but I do wonder
His insolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius.

BRUTUS:
Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already he's well graced, can not
Better be held nor more attain'd than by
A place below the first: for what miscarries
Shall be the general's fault, though he perform
To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Marcius 'O if he
Had borne the business!'

SICINIUS:
Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Marcius shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.

BRUTUS:
Come:
Half all Cominius' honours are to Marcius.
Though Marcius earned them not, and all his faults
To Marcius shall be honours, though indeed
In aught he merit not.

SICINIUS:
Let's hence, and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
More than his singularity, he goes
Upon this present action.

BRUTUS:
Lets along.

First Senator:
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.

AUFIDIUS:
Is it not yours?
What ever have been thought on in this state,
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
Had circumvention? 'Tis not four days gone
Since I heard thence; these are the words: I think
I have the letter here; yes, here it is.
'They have press'd a power, but it is not known
Whether for east or west: the dearth is great;
The people mutinous; and it is rumour'd,
Cominius, Marcius your old enemy,
Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this preparation
Whither 'tis bent: most likely 'tis for you:
Consider of it.'

First Senator:
Our army's in the field
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.

AUFIDIUS:
Nor did you think it folly
To keep your great pretences veil'd till when
They needs must show themselves; which
in the hatching,
It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery.
We shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
Should know we were afoot.

Second Senator:
Noble Aufidius,
Take your commission; hie you to your bands:
Let us alone to guard Corioli:
If they set down before 's, for the remove
Bring your army; but, I think, you'll find
They've not prepared for us.

AUFIDIUS:
O, doubt not that;
I speak from certainties. Nay, more,
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your honours.
If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet,
'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.

All:
The gods assist you!

AUFIDIUS:
And keep your honours safe!

First Senator:
Farewell.

Second Senator:
Farewell.

All:
Farewell.

VOLUMNIA:
I pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a
more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I
should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he
won honour than in the embracements of his bed where
he would show most love. When yet he was but
tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when
youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when
for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not
sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering
how honour would become such a person. that it was
no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if
renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek
danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel
war I sent him; from whence he returned, his brows
bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not
more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child
than now in first seeing he had proved himself a
man.

VIRGILIA:
But had he died in the business, madam; how then?

VOLUMNIA:
Then his good report should have been my son; I
therein would have found issue. Hear me profess
sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love
alike and none less dear than thine and my good
Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their
country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.

Gentlewoman:
Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.

VIRGILIA:
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.

VOLUMNIA:
Indeed, you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair,
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him:
Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus:
'Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear,
Though you were born in Rome:' his bloody brow
With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes,
Like to a harvest-man that's task'd to mow
Or all or lose his hire.

VIRGILIA:
His bloody brow! O Jupiter, no blood!

VOLUMNIA:
Away, you fool! it more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, look'd not lovelier
Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword, contemning. Tell Valeria,
We are fit to bid her welcome.

VIRGILIA:
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!

VOLUMNIA:
He'll beat Aufidius 'head below his knee
And tread upon his neck.

VALERIA:
My ladies both, good day to you.

VOLUMNIA:
Sweet madam.

VIRGILIA:
I am glad to see your ladyship.

VALERIA:
How do you both? you are manifest house-keepers.
What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good
faith. How does your little son?

VIRGILIA:
I thank your ladyship; well, good madam.

VOLUMNIA:
He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than
look upon his school-master.

VALERIA:
O' my word, the father's son: I'll swear,'tis a
very pretty boy. O' my troth, I looked upon him o'
Wednesday half an hour together: has such a
confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded
butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go
again; and after it again; and over and over he
comes, and again; catched it again; or whether his
fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his
teeth and tear it; O, I warrant it, how he mammocked
it!

VOLUMNIA:
One on 's father's moods.

VALERIA:
Indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.

VIRGILIA:
A crack, madam.

VALERIA:
Come, lay aside your stitchery; I must have you play
the idle husewife with me this afternoon.

VIRGILIA:
No, good madam; I will not out of doors.

VALERIA:
Not out of doors!

VOLUMNIA:
She shall, she shall.

VIRGILIA:
Indeed, no, by your patience; I'll not over the
threshold till my lord return from the wars.

VALERIA:
Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come,
you must go visit the good lady that lies in.

VIRGILIA:
I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with
my prayers; but I cannot go thither.

VOLUMNIA:
Why, I pray you?

VIRGILIA:
'Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.

VALERIA:
You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all
the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill
Ithaca full of moths. Come; I would your cambric
were sensible as your finger, that you might leave
pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.

VIRGILIA:
No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth.

VALERIA:
In truth, la, go with me; and I'll tell you
excellent news of your husband.

VIRGILIA:
O, good madam, there can be none yet.

VALERIA:
Verily, I do not jest with you; there came news from
him last night.

VIRGILIA:
Indeed, madam?

VALERIA:
In earnest, it's true; I heard a senator speak it.
Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth; against
whom Cominius the general is gone, with one part of
our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set
down before their city Corioli; they nothing doubt
prevailing and to make it brief wars. This is true,
on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us.

VIRGILIA:
Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in every
thing hereafter.

VOLUMNIA:
Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but
disease our better mirth.

VALERIA:
In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then.
Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy
solemness out o' door. and go along with us.

VIRGILIA:
No, at a word, madam; indeed, I must not. I wish
you much mirth.

VALERIA:
Well, then, farewell.

MARCIUS:
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.

LARTIUS:
My horse to yours, no.

MARCIUS:
'Tis done.

LARTIUS:
Agreed.

MARCIUS:
Say, has our general met the enemy?

Messenger:
They lie in view; but have not spoke as yet.

LARTIUS:
So, the good horse is mine.

MARCIUS:
I'll buy him of you.

LARTIUS:
No, I'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him I will
For half a hundred years. Summon the town.

MARCIUS:
How far off lie these armies?

Messenger:
Within this mile and half.

MARCIUS:
Then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours.
Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from hence,
To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.
Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls?

First Senator:
No, nor a man that fears you less than he,
That's lesser than a little.
Hark! our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls,
Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes;
They'll open of themselves.
Hark you. far off!
There is Aufidius; list, what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.

MARCIUS:
O, they are at it!

LARTIUS:
Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!

MARCIUS:
They fear us not, but issue forth their city.
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than shields. Advance,
brave Titus:
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on, my fellows:
He that retires I'll take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge.

MARCIUS:
All the contagion of the south light on you,
You shames of Rome! you herd of--Boils and plagues
Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd
Further than seen and one infect another
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
All hurt behind; backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear! Mend and charge home,
Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe
And make my wars on you: look to't: come on;
If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives,
As they us to our trenches followed.
So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds:
'Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.

First Soldier:
Fool-hardiness; not I.

Second Soldier:
Nor I.

First Soldier:
See, they have shut him in.

All:
To the pot, I warrant him.

LARTIUS:
What is become of Marcius?

All:
Slain, sir, doubtless.

First Soldier:
Following the fliers at the very heels,
With them he enters; who, upon the sudden,
Clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone,
To answer all the city.

LARTIUS:
O noble fellow!
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Marcius:
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes; but, with thy grim looks and
The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds,
Thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.

First Soldier:
Look, sir.

LARTIUS:
O,'tis Marcius!
Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.

First Roman:
This will I carry to Rome.

Second Roman:
And I this.

Third Roman:
A murrain on't! I took this for silver.

MARCIUS:
See here these movers that do prize their hours
At a crack'd drachm! Cushions, leaden spoons,
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them!
And hark, what noise the general makes! To him!
There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius,
Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take
Convenient numbers to make good the city;
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.

LARTIUS:
Worthy sir, thou bleed'st;
Thy exercise hath been too violent for
A second course of fight.

MARCIUS:
Sir, praise me not;
My work hath yet not warm'd me: fare you well:
The blood I drop is rather physical
Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus
I will appear, and fight.

LARTIUS:
Now the fair goddess, Fortune,
Fall deep in love with thee; and her great charms
Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!

MARCIUS:
Thy friend no less
Than those she placeth highest! So, farewell.

LARTIUS:
Thou worthiest Marcius!
Go, sound thy trumpet in the market-place;
Call thither all the officers o' the town,
Where they shall know our mind: away!

COMINIUS:
Breathe you, my friends: well fought;
we are come off
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands,
Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
The charges of our friends. Ye Roman gods!
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling
fronts encountering,
May give you thankful sacrifice.
Thy news?

Messenger:
The citizens of Corioli have issued,
And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle:
I saw our party to their trenches driven,
And then I came away.

COMINIUS:
Though thou speak'st truth,
Methinks thou speak'st not well.
How long is't since?

Messenger:
Above an hour, my lord.

COMINIUS:
'Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums:
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour,
And bring thy news so late?

Messenger:
Spies of the Volsces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about, else had I, sir,
Half an hour since brought my report.

COMINIUS:
Who's yonder,
That does appear as he were flay'd? O gods
He has the stamp of Marcius; and I have
Before-time seen him thus.

MARCIUS:

COMINIUS:
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour
More than I know the sound of Marcius' tongue
From every meaner man.

MARCIUS:
Come I too late?

COMINIUS:
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.

MARCIUS:
O, let me clip ye
In arms as sound as when I woo'd, in heart
As merry as when our nuptial day was done,
And tapers burn'd to bedward!

COMINIUS:
Flower of warriors,
How is it with Titus Lartius?

MARCIUS:
As with a man busied about decrees:
Condemning some to death, and some to exile;
Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other;
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
To let him slip at will.

COMINIUS:
Where is that slave
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
Where is he? call him hither.

MARCIUS:
Let him alone;
He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen,
The common file--a plague! tribunes for them!--
The mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge
From rascals worse than they.

COMINIUS:
But how prevail'd you?

MARCIUS:
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?

COMINIUS:
Marcius,
We have at disadvantage fought and did
Retire to win our purpose.

MARCIUS:
How lies their battle? know you on which side
They have placed their men of trust?

COMINIUS:
As I guess, Marcius,
Their bands i' the vaward are the Antiates,
Of their best trust; o'er them Aufidius,
Their very heart of hope.

MARCIUS:
I do beseech you,
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
By the blood we have shed together, by the vows
We have made to endure friends, that you directly
Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates;
And that you not delay the present, but,
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
We prove this very hour.

COMINIUS:
Though I could wish
You were conducted to a gentle bath
And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking: take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.

MARCIUS:
Those are they
That most are willing. If any such be here--
As it were sin to doubt--that love this painting
Wherein you see me smear'd; if any fear
Lesser his person than an ill report;
If any think brave death outweighs bad life
And that his country's dearer than himself;
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus, to express his disposition,
And follow Marcius.
O, me alone! make you a sword of me?
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volsces? none of you but is
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
A shield as hard as his. A certain number,
Though thanks to all, must I select
from all: the rest
Shall bear the business in some other fight,
As cause will be obey'd. Please you to march;
And four shall quickly draw out my command,
Which men are best inclined.

COMINIUS:
March on, my fellows:
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all with us.

LARTIUS:
So, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties,
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve
For a short holding: if we lose the field,
We cannot keep the town.

Lieutenant:
Fear not our care, sir.

LARTIUS:
Hence, and shut your gates upon's.
Our guider, come; to the Roman camp conduct us.

MARCIUS:
I'll fight with none but thee; for I do hate thee
Worse than a promise-breaker.

AUFIDIUS:
We hate alike:
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.

MARCIUS:
Let the first budger die the other's slave,
And the gods doom him after!

AUFIDIUS:
If I fly, Marcius,
Holloa me like a hare.

MARCIUS:
Within these three hours, Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioli walls,
And made what work I pleased: 'tis not my blood
Wherein thou seest me mask'd; for thy revenge
Wrench up thy power to the highest.

AUFIDIUS:
Wert thou the Hector
That was the whip of your bragg'd progeny,
Thou shouldst not scape me here.
Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me
In your condemned seconds.

COMINIUS:
If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work,
Thou'ldst not believe thy deeds: but I'll report it
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles,
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
I' the end admire, where ladies shall be frighted,
And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the
dull tribunes,
That, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours,
Shall say against their hearts 'We thank the gods
Our Rome hath such a soldier.'
Yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast,
Having fully dined before.

LARTIUS:
O general,
Here is the steed, we the caparison:
Hadst thou beheld--

MARCIUS:
Pray now, no more: my mother,
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
As you have done; that's what I can; induced
As you have been; that's for my country:
He that has but effected his good will
Hath overta'en mine act.

COMINIUS:
You shall not be
The grave of your deserving; Rome must know
The value of her own: 'twere a concealment
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
To hide your doings; and to silence that,
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd,
Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done--before our army hear me.

MARCIUS:
I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves remember'd.

COMINIUS:
Should they not,
Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude,
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses,
Whereof we have ta'en good and good store, of all
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
We render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth,
Before the common distribution, at
Your only choice.

MARCIUS:
I thank you, general;
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it;
And stand upon my common part with those
That have beheld the doing.

MARCIUS:
May these same instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall
I' the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be
Made all of false-faced soothing!
When steel grows soft as the parasite's silk,
Let him be made a coverture for the wars!
No more, I say! For that I have not wash'd
My nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch.--
Which, without note, here's many else have done,--
You shout me forth
In acclamations hyperbolical;
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises sauced with lies.

COMINIUS:
Too modest are you;
More cruel to your good report than grateful
To us that give you truly: by your patience,
If 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore, be it known,
As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius
Wears this war's garland: in token of the which,
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging; and from this time,
For what he did before Corioli, call him,
With all the applause and clamour of the host,
CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS! Bear
The addition nobly ever!

All:
Caius Marcius Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS:
I will go wash;
And when my face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you.
I mean to stride your steed, and at all times
To undercrest your good addition
To the fairness of my power.

COMINIUS:
So, to our tent;
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius,
Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate,
For their own good and ours.

LARTIUS:
I shall, my lord.

CORIOLANUS:
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Of my lord general.

COMINIUS:
Take't; 'tis yours. What is't?

CORIOLANUS:
I sometime lay here in Corioli
At a poor man's house; he used me kindly:
He cried to me; I saw him prisoner;
But then Aufidius was within my view,
And wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity: I request you
To give my poor host freedom.

COMINIUS:
O, well begg'd!
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
Be free as is the wind. Deliver him, Titus.

LARTIUS:
Marcius, his name?

CORIOLANUS:
By Jupiter! forgot.
I am weary; yea, my memory is tired.
Have we no wine here?

COMINIUS:
Go we to our tent:
The blood upon your visage dries; 'tis time
It should be look'd to: come.

AUFIDIUS:
The town is ta'en!

First Soldier:
'Twill be deliver'd back on good condition.

AUFIDIUS:
Condition!
I would I were a Roman; for I cannot,
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition!
What good condition can a treaty find
I' the part that is at mercy? Five times, Marcius,
I have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me,
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By the elements,
If e'er again I meet him beard to beard,
He's mine, or I am his: mine emulation
Hath not that honour in't it had; for where
I thought to crush him in an equal force,
True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way
Or wrath or craft may get him.

First Soldier:
He's the devil.

AUFIDIUS:
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour's poison'd
With only suffering stain by him; for him
Shall fly out of itself: nor sleep nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst
My hate to Marcius: where I find him, were it
At home, upon my brother's guard, even there,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the city;
Learn how 'tis held; and what they are that must
Be hostages for Rome.

First Soldier:
Will not you go?

AUFIDIUS:
I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you--
'Tis south the city mills--bring me word thither
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.

First Soldier:
I shall, sir.

MENENIUS:
The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.

BRUTUS:
Good or bad?

MENENIUS:
Not according to the prayer of the people, for they
love not Marcius.

SICINIUS:
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.

MENENIUS:
Pray you, who does the wolf love?

SICINIUS:
The lamb.

MENENIUS:
Ay, to devour him; as the hungry plebeians would the
noble Marcius.

BRUTUS:
He's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.

MENENIUS:
He's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two
are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.

Both:
Well, sir.

MENENIUS:
In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two
have not in abundance?

BRUTUS:
He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.

SICINIUS:
Especially in pride.

BRUTUS:
And topping all others in boasting.

MENENIUS:
This is strange now: do you two know how you are
censured here in the city, I mean of us o' the
right-hand file? do you?

Both:
Why, how are we censured?

MENENIUS:
Because you talk of pride now,--will you not be angry?

Both:
Well, well, sir, well.

MENENIUS:
Why, 'tis no great matter; for a very little thief of
occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience:
give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at
your pleasures; at the least if you take it as a
pleasure to you in being so. You blame Marcius for
being proud?

BRUTUS:
We do it not alone, sir.

MENENIUS:
I know you can do very little alone; for your helps
are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous
single: your abilities are too infant-like for
doing much alone. You talk of pride: O that you
could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks,
and make but an interior survey of your good selves!
O that you could!

BRUTUS:
What then, sir?

MENENIUS:
Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting,
proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as
any in Rome.

SICINIUS:
Menenius, you are known well enough too.

MENENIUS:
I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that
loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying
Tiber in't; said to be something imperfect in
favouring the first complaint; hasty and tinder-like
upon too trivial motion; one that converses more
with the buttock of the night than with the forehead
of the morning: what I think I utter, and spend my
malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as
you are--I cannot call you Lycurguses--if the drink
you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a
crooked face at it. I can't say your worships have
delivered the matter well, when I find the ass in
compound with the major part of your syllables: and
though I must be content to bear with those that say
you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that
tell you you have good faces. If you see this in
the map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known
well enough too? what barm can your bisson
conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be
known well enough too?

BRUTUS:
Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.

MENENIUS:
You know neither me, yourselves nor any thing. You
are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you
wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a
cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller;
and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a
second day of audience. When you are hearing a
matter between party and party, if you chance to be
pinched with the colic, you make faces like
mummers; set up the bloody flag against all
patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot,
dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled
by your hearing: all the peace you make in their
cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are
a pair of strange ones.

BRUTUS:
Come, come, you are well understood to be a
perfecter giber for the table than a necessary
bencher in the Capitol.

MENENIUS:
Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall
encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When
you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the
wagging of your beards; and your beards deserve not
so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's
cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack-
saddle. Yet you must be saying, Marcius is proud;
who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors
since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the
best of 'em were hereditary hangmen. God-den to
your worships: more of your conversation would
infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly
plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you.
How now, my as fair as noble ladies,--and the moon,
were she earthly, no nobler,--whither do you follow
your eyes so fast?

VOLUMNIA:
Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; for
the love of Juno, let's go.

MENENIUS:
Ha! Marcius coming home!

VOLUMNIA:
Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperous
approbation.

MENENIUS:
Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo!
Marcius coming home!

VOLUMNIA:
Nay,'tis true.

VOLUMNIA:
Look, here's a letter from him: the state hath
another, his wife another; and, I think, there's one
at home for you.

MENENIUS:
I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for
me!

VIRGILIA:
Yes, certain, there's a letter for you; I saw't.

MENENIUS:
A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven
years' health; in which time I will make a lip at
the physician: the most sovereign prescription in
Galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative,
of no better report than a horse-drench. Is he
not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.

VIRGILIA:
O, no, no, no.

VOLUMNIA:
O, he is wounded; I thank the gods for't.

MENENIUS:
So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a'
victory in his pocket? the wounds become him.

VOLUMNIA:
On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home
with the oaken garland.

MENENIUS:
Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?

VOLUMNIA:
Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but
Aufidius got off.

MENENIUS:
And 'twas time for him too, I'll warrant him that:
an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so
fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold
that's in them. Is the senate possessed of this?

VOLUMNIA:
Good ladies, let's go. Yes, yes, yes; the senate
has letters from the general, wherein he gives my
son the whole name of the war: he hath in this
action outdone his former deeds doubly

VALERIA:
In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.

MENENIUS:
Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without his
true purchasing.

VIRGILIA:
The gods grant them true!

VOLUMNIA:
True! pow, wow.

MENENIUS:
True! I'll be sworn they are true.
Where is he wounded?
God save your good worships! Marcius is coming
home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded?

VOLUMNIA:
I' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be
large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall
stand for his place. He received in the repulse of
Tarquin seven hurts i' the body.

MENENIUS:
One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,--there's
nine that I know.

VOLUMNIA:
He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five
wounds upon him.

MENENIUS:
Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave.
Hark! the trumpets.

VOLUMNIA:
These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he
carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears:
Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie;
Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.

Herald:
Know, Rome, that all alone Marcius did fight
Within Corioli gates: where he hath won,
With fame, a name to Caius Marcius; these
In honour follows Coriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

All:
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS:
No more of this; it does offend my heart:
Pray now, no more.

COMINIUS:
Look, sir, your mother!

CORIOLANUS:
O,
You have, I know, petition'd all the gods
For my prosperity!

VOLUMNIA:
Nay, my good soldier, up;
My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and
By deed-achieving honour newly named,--
What is it?--Coriolanus must I call thee?--
But O, thy wife!

CORIOLANUS:
My gracious silence, hail!
Wouldst thou have laugh'd had I come coffin'd home,
That weep'st to see me triumph? Ay, my dear,
Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear,
And mothers that lack sons.

MENENIUS:
Now, the gods crown thee!

CORIOLANUS:
And live you yet?
O my sweet lady, pardon.

VOLUMNIA:
I know not where to turn: O, welcome home:
And welcome, general: and ye're welcome all.

MENENIUS:
A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep
And I could laugh, I am light and heavy. Welcome.
A curse begin at very root on's heart,
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men,
We have some old crab-trees here
at home that will not
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors:
We call a nettle but a nettle and
The faults of fools but folly.

COMINIUS:
Ever right.

CORIOLANUS:
Menenius ever, ever.

Herald:
Give way there, and go on!

CORIOLANUS:

VOLUMNIA:
I have lived
To see inherited my very wishes
And the buildings of my fancy: only
There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Our Rome will cast upon thee.

CORIOLANUS:
Know, good mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way,
Than sway with them in theirs.

COMINIUS:
On, to the Capitol!

BRUTUS:
All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse
Into a rapture lets her baby cry
While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins
Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows,
Are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges horsed
With variable complexions, all agreeing
In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
To win a vulgar station: or veil'd dames
Commit the war of white and damask in
Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil
Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
Were slily crept into his human powers
And gave him graceful posture.

SICINIUS:
On the sudden,
I warrant him consul.

BRUTUS:
Then our office may,
During his power, go sleep.

SICINIUS:
He cannot temperately transport his honours
From where he should begin and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.

BRUTUS:
In that there's comfort.

SICINIUS:
Doubt not
The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice will forget
With the least cause these his new honours, which
That he will give them make I as little question
As he is proud to do't.

BRUTUS:
I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Appear i' the market-place nor on him put
The napless vesture of humility;
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
To the people, beg their stinking breaths.

SICINIUS:
'Tis right.

BRUTUS:
It was his word: O, he would miss it rather
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him,
And the desire of the nobles.

SICINIUS:
I wish no better
Than have him hold that purpose and to put it
In execution.

BRUTUS:
'Tis most like he will.

SICINIUS:
It shall be to him then as our good wills,
A sure destruction.

BRUTUS:
So it must fall out
To him or our authorities. For an end,
We must suggest the people in what hatred
He still hath held them; that to's power he would
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and
Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them,
In human action and capacity,
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Than camels in the war, who have their provand
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.

SICINIUS:
This, as you say, suggested
At some time when his soaring insolence
Shall touch the people--which time shall not want,
If he be put upon 't; and that's as easy
As to set dogs on sheep--will be his fire
To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze
Shall darken him for ever.

BRUTUS:
What's the matter?

Messenger:
You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought
That Marcius shall be consul:
I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and
The blind to bear him speak: matrons flung gloves,
Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers,
Upon him as he pass'd: the nobles bended,
As to Jove's statue, and the commons made
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts:
I never saw the like.

BRUTUS:
Let's to the Capitol;
And carry with us ears and eyes for the time,
But hearts for the event.

SICINIUS:
Have with you.

First Officer:
Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand
for consulships?

Second Officer:
Three, they say: but 'tis thought of every one
Coriolanus will carry it.

First Officer:
That's a brave fellow; but he's vengeance proud, and
loves not the common people.

Second Officer:
Faith, there had been many great men that have
flattered the people, who ne'er loved them; and there
be many that they have loved, they know not
wherefore: so that, if they love they know not why,
they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for
Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate
him manifests the true knowledge he has in their
disposition; and out of his noble carelessness lets
them plainly see't.

First Officer:
If he did not care whether he had their love or no,
he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither
good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater
devotion than can render it him; and leaves
nothing undone that may fully discover him their
opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and
displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he
dislikes, to flatter them for their love.

Second Officer:
He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his
ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who,
having been supple and courteous to the people,
bonneted, without any further deed to have them at
an into their estimation and report: but he hath so
planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions
in their hearts, that for their tongues to be
silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of
ingrateful injury; to report otherwise, were a
malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck
reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.

First Officer:
No more of him; he is a worthy man: make way, they
are coming.

MENENIUS:
Having determined of the Volsces and
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his noble service that
Hath thus stood for his country: therefore,
please you,
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire
The present consul, and last general
In our well-found successes, to report
A little of that worthy work perform'd
By Caius Marcius Coriolanus, whom
We met here both to thank and to remember
With honours like himself.

First Senator:
Speak, good Cominius:
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state's defective for requital
Than we to stretch it out.
Masters o' the people,
We do request your kindest ears, and after,
Your loving motion toward the common body,
To yield what passes here.

SICINIUS:
We are convented
Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts
Inclinable to honour and advance
The theme of our assembly.

BRUTUS:
Which the rather
We shall be blest to do, if he remember
A kinder value of the people than
He hath hereto prized them at.

MENENIUS:
That's off, that's off;
I would you rather had been silent. Please you
To hear Cominius speak?

BRUTUS:
Most willingly;
But yet my caution was more pertinent
Than the rebuke you give it.

MENENIUS:
He loves your people
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.
Worthy Cominius, speak.
Nay, keep your place.

First Senator:
Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.

CORIOLANUS:
Your horror's pardon:
I had rather have my wounds to heal again
Than hear say how I got them.

BRUTUS:
Sir, I hope
My words disbench'd you not.

CORIOLANUS:
No, sir: yet oft,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but
your people,
I love them as they weigh.

MENENIUS:
Pray now, sit down.

CORIOLANUS:
I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
To hear my nothings monster'd.

MENENIUS:
Masters of the people,
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter--
That's thousand to one good one--when you now see
He had rather venture all his limbs for honour
Than one on's ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.

COMINIUS:
I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be utter'd feebly. It is held
That valour is the chiefest virtue, and
Most dignifies the haver: if it be,
The man I speak of cannot in the world
Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight,
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
The bristled lips before him: be bestrid
An o'er-press'd Roman and i' the consul's view
Slew three opposers: Tarquin's self he met,
And struck him on his knee: in that day's feats,
When he might act the woman in the scene,
He proved best man i' the field, and for his meed
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
Man-enter'd thus, he waxed like a sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
He lurch'd all swords of the garland. For this last,
Before and in Corioli, let me say,
I cannot speak him home: he stopp'd the fliers;
And by his rare example made the coward
Turn terror into sport: as weeds before
A vessel under sail, so men obey'd
And fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp,
Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying cries: alone he enter'd
The mortal gate of the city, which he painted
With shunless destiny; aidless came off,
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Corioli like a planet: now all's his:
When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce
His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit
Re-quicken'd what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he; where he did
Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if
'Twere a perpetual spoil: and till we call'd
Both field and city ours, he never stood
To ease his breast with panting.

MENENIUS:
Worthy man!

First Senator:
He cannot but with measure fit the honours
Which we devise him.

COMINIUS:
Our spoils he kick'd at,
And look'd upon things precious as they were
The common muck of the world: he covets less
Than misery itself would give; rewards
His deeds with doing them, and is content
To spend the time to end it.

MENENIUS:
He's right noble:
Let him be call'd for.

First Senator:
Call Coriolanus.

Officer:
He doth appear.

MENENIUS:
The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
To make thee consul.

CORIOLANUS:
I do owe them still
My life and services.

MENENIUS:
It then remains
That you do speak to the people.

CORIOLANUS:
I do beseech you,
Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot
Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them,
For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you
That I may pass this doing.

SICINIUS:
Sir, the people
Must have their voices; neither will they bate
One jot of ceremony.

MENENIUS:
Put them not to't:
Pray you, go fit you to the custom and
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
Your honour with your form.

CORIOLANUS:
It is apart
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
Be taken from the people.

BRUTUS:
Mark you that?

CORIOLANUS:
To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus;
Show them the unaching scars which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only!

MENENIUS:
Do not stand upon't.
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul
Wish we all joy and honour.

Senators:
To Coriolanus come all joy and honour!

BRUTUS:
You see how he intends to use the people.

SICINIUS:
May they perceive's intent! He will require them,
As if he did contemn what he requested
Should be in them to give.

BRUTUS:
Come, we'll inform them
Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace,
I know, they do attend us.

First Citizen:
Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.

Second Citizen:
We may, sir, if we will.

Third Citizen:
We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a
power that we have no power to do; for if he show us
his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our
tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if
he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him
our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is
monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful,
were to make a monster of the multitude: of the
which we being members, should bring ourselves to be
monstrous members.

First Citizen:
And to make us no better thought of, a little help
will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he
himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.

Third Citizen:
We have been called so of many; not that our heads
are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald,
but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and
truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of
one skull, they would fly east, west, north, south,
and their consent of one direct way should be at
once to all the points o' the compass.

Second Citizen:
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would
fly?

Third Citizen:
Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's
will;'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but
if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.

Second Citizen:
Why that way?

Third Citizen:
To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts
melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return
for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.

Second Citizen:
You are never without your tricks: you may, you may.

Third Citizen:
Are you all resolved to give your voices? But
that's no matter, the greater part carries it. I
say, if he would incline to the people, there was
never a worthier man.
Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his
behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to
come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and
by threes. He's to make his requests by
particulars; wherein every one of us has a single
honour, in giving him our own voices with our own
tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how
you shall go by him.

All:
Content, content.

MENENIUS:
O sir, you are not right: have you not known
The worthiest men have done't?

CORIOLANUS:
What must I say?
'I Pray, sir'--Plague upon't! I cannot bring
My tongue to such a pace:--'Look, sir, my wounds!
I got them in my country's service, when
Some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran
From the noise of our own drums.'

MENENIUS:
O me, the gods!
You must not speak of that: you must desire them
To think upon you.

CORIOLANUS:
Think upon me! hang 'em!
I would they would forget me, like the virtues
Which our divines lose by 'em.

MENENIUS:
You'll mar all:
I'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you,
In wholesome manner.

CORIOLANUS:
Bid them wash their faces
And keep their teeth clean.
So, here comes a brace.
You know the cause, air, of my standing here.

Third Citizen:
We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to't.

CORIOLANUS:
Mine own desert.

Second Citizen:
Your own desert!

CORIOLANUS:
Ay, but not mine own desire.

Third Citizen:
How not your own desire?

CORIOLANUS:
No, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the
poor with begging.

Third Citizen:
You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to
gain by you.

CORIOLANUS:
Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship?

First Citizen:
The price is to ask it kindly.

CORIOLANUS:
Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me ha't: I have wounds to
show you, which shall be yours in private. Your
good voice, sir; what say you?

Second Citizen:
You shall ha' it, worthy sir.

CORIOLANUS:
A match, sir. There's in all two worthy voices
begged. I have your alms: adieu.

Third Citizen:
But this is something odd.

Second Citizen:
An 'twere to give again,--but 'tis no matter.

CORIOLANUS:
Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your
voices that I may be consul, I have here the
customary gown.

Fourth Citizen:
You have deserved nobly of your country, and you
have not deserved nobly.

CORIOLANUS:
Your enigma?

Fourth Citizen:
You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have
been a rod to her friends; you have not indeed loved
the common people.

CORIOLANUS:
You should account me the more virtuous that I have
not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my
sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer
estimation of them; 'tis a condition they account
gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is
rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise
the insinuating nod and be off to them most
counterfeitly; that is, sir, I will counterfeit the
bewitchment of some popular man and give it
bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you,
I may be consul.

Fifth Citizen:
We hope to find you our friend; and therefore give
you our voices heartily.

Fourth Citizen:
You have received many wounds for your country.

CORIOLANUS:
I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I
will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.

Both Citizens:
The gods give you joy, sir, heartily!

CORIOLANUS:
Most sweet voices!
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here,
To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear,
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to't:
What custom wills, in all things should we do't,
The dust on antique time would lie unswept,
And mountainous error be too highly heapt
For truth to o'er-peer. Rather than fool it so,
Let the high office and the honour go
To one that would do thus. I am half through;
The one part suffer'd, the other will I do.
Here come more voices.
Your voices: for your voices I have fought;
Watch'd for your voices; for Your voices bear
Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six
I have seen and heard of; for your voices have
Done many things, some less, some more your voices:
Indeed I would be consul.

Sixth Citizen:
He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest
man's voice.

Seventh Citizen:
Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy,
and make him good friend to the people!

All Citizens:
Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!

CORIOLANUS:
Worthy voices!

MENENIUS:
You have stood your limitation; and the tribunes
Endue you with the people's voice: remains
That, in the official marks invested, you
Anon do meet the senate.

CORIOLANUS:
Is this done?

SICINIUS:
The custom of request you have discharged:
The people do admit you, and are summon'd
To meet anon, upon your approbation.

CORIOLANUS:
Where? at the senate-house?

SICINIUS:
There, Coriolanus.

CORIOLANUS:
May I change these garments?

SICINIUS:
You may, sir.

CORIOLANUS:
That I'll straight do; and, knowing myself again,
Repair to the senate-house.

MENENIUS:
I'll keep you company. Will you along?

BRUTUS:
We stay here for the people.

SICINIUS:
Fare you well.
He has it now, and by his looks methink
'Tis warm at 's heart.

BRUTUS:
With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds.
will you dismiss the people?

SICINIUS:
How now, my masters! have you chose this man?

First Citizen:
He has our voices, sir.

BRUTUS:
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.

Second Citizen:
Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice,
He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.

Third Citizen:
Certainly
He flouted us downright.

First Citizen:
No,'tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.

Second Citizen:
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
He used us scornfully: he should have show'd us
His marks of merit, wounds received for's country.

SICINIUS:
Why, so he did, I am sure.

Citizens:
No, no; no man saw 'em.

Third Citizen:
He said he had wounds, which he could show
in private;
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
'I would be consul,' says he: 'aged custom,
But by your voices, will not so permit me;
Your voices therefore.' When we granted that,
Here was 'I thank you for your voices: thank you:
Your most sweet voices: now you have left
your voices,
I have no further with you.' Was not this mockery?

SICINIUS:
Why either were you ignorant to see't,
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
To yield your voices?

BRUTUS:
Could you not have told him
As you were lesson'd, when he had no power,
But was a petty servant to the state,
He was your enemy, ever spake against
Your liberties and the charters that you bear
I' the body of the weal; and now, arriving
A place of potency and sway o' the state,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might
Be curses to yourselves? You should have said
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
Would think upon you for your voices and
Translate his malice towards you into love,
Standing your friendly lord.

SICINIUS:
Thus to have said,
As you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit
And tried his inclination; from him pluck'd
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
As cause had call'd you up, have held him to
Or else it would have gall'd his surly nature,
Which easily endures not article
Tying him to aught; so putting him to rage,
You should have ta'en the advantage of his choler
And pass'd him unelected.

BRUTUS:
Did you perceive
He did solicit you in free contempt
When he did need your loves, and do you think
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you,
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies
No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry
Against the rectorship of judgment?

SICINIUS:
Have you
Ere now denied the asker? and now again
Of him that did not ask, but mock, bestow
Your sued-for tongues?

Third Citizen:
He's not confirm'd; we may deny him yet.

Second Citizen:
And will deny him:
I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.

First Citizen:
I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.

BRUTUS:
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends,
They have chose a consul that will from them take
Their liberties; make them of no more voice
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
As therefore kept to do so.

SICINIUS:
Let them assemble,
And on a safer judgment all revoke
Your ignorant election; enforce his pride,
And his old hate unto you; besides, forget not
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
How in his suit he scorn'd you; but your loves,
Thinking upon his services, took from you
The apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
After the inveterate hate he bears you.

BRUTUS:
Lay
A fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured,
No impediment between, but that you must
Cast your election on him.

SICINIUS:
Say, you chose him
More after our commandment than as guided
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
Than what you should, made you against the grain
To voice him consul: lay the fault on us.

BRUTUS:
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you.
How youngly he began to serve his country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The noble house o' the Marcians, from whence came
That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son,
Who, after great Hostilius, here was king;
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
That our beat water brought by conduits hither;
And  
Twice being  
Was his great ancestor.

SICINIUS:
One thus descended,
That hath beside well in his person wrought
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances: but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke
Your sudden approbation.

BRUTUS:
Say, you ne'er had done't--
Harp on that still--but by our putting on;
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair to the Capitol.

All:
We will so: almost all
Repent in their election.

BRUTUS:
Let them go on;
This mutiny were better put in hazard,
Than stay, past doubt, for greater:
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.

SICINIUS:
To the Capitol, come:
We will be there before the stream o' the people;
And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,
Which we have goaded onward.

CORIOLANUS:
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?

LARTIUS:
He had, my lord; and that it was which caused
Our swifter composition.

CORIOLANUS:
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road.
Upon's again.

COMINIUS:
They are worn, lord consul, so,
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their banners wave again.

CORIOLANUS:
Saw you Aufidius?

LARTIUS:
On safe-guard he came to me; and did curse
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town: he is retired to Antium.

CORIOLANUS:
Spoke he of me?

LARTIUS:
He did, my lord.

CORIOLANUS:
How? what?

LARTIUS:
How often he had met you, sword to sword;
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be call'd your vanquisher.

CORIOLANUS:
At Antium lives he?

LARTIUS:
At Antium.

CORIOLANUS:
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.
Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o' the common mouth: I do despise them;
For they do prank them in authority,
Against all noble sufferance.

SICINIUS:
Pass no further.

CORIOLANUS:
Ha! what is that?

BRUTUS:
It will be dangerous to go on: no further.

CORIOLANUS:
What makes this change?

MENENIUS:
The matter?

COMINIUS:
Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?

BRUTUS:
Cominius, no.

CORIOLANUS:
Have I had children's voices?

First Senator:
Tribunes, give way; he shall to the market-place.

BRUTUS:
The people are incensed against him.

SICINIUS:
Stop,
Or all will fall in broil.

CORIOLANUS:
Are these your herd?
Must these have voices, that can yield them now
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are
your offices?
You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth?
Have you not set them on?

MENENIUS:
Be calm, be calm.

CORIOLANUS:
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
To curb the will of the nobility:
Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule
Nor ever will be ruled.

BRUTUS:
Call't not a plot:
The people cry you mock'd them, and of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repined;
Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them
Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.

CORIOLANUS:
Why, this was known before.

BRUTUS:
Not to them all.

CORIOLANUS:
Have you inform'd them sithence?

BRUTUS:
How! I inform them!

CORIOLANUS:
You are like to do such business.

BRUTUS:
Not unlike,
Each way, to better yours.

CORIOLANUS:
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow tribune.

SICINIUS:
You show too much of that
For which the people stir: if you will pass
To where you are bound, you must inquire your way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so noble as a consul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune.

MENENIUS:
Let's be calm.

COMINIUS:
The people are abused; set on. This paltering
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely
I' the plain way of his merit.

CORIOLANUS:
Tell me of corn!
This was my speech, and I will speak't again--

MENENIUS:
Not now, not now.

First Senator:
Not in this heat, sir, now.

CORIOLANUS:
Now, as I live, I will. My nobler friends,
I crave their pardons:
For the mutable, rank-scented many, let them
Regard me as I do not flatter, and
Therein behold themselves: I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
Which we ourselves have plough'd for, sow'd,
and scatter'd,
By mingling them with us, the honour'd number,
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that
Which they have given to beggars.

MENENIUS:
Well, no more.

First Senator:
No more words, we beseech you.

CORIOLANUS:
How! no more!
As for my country I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
Coin words till their decay against those measles,
Which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.

BRUTUS:
You speak o' the people,
As if you were a god to punish, not
A man of their infirmity.

SICINIUS:
'Twere well
We let the people know't.

MENENIUS:
What, what? his choler?

CORIOLANUS:
Choler!
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, 'twould be my mind!

SICINIUS:
It is a mind
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Not poison any further.

CORIOLANUS:
Shall remain!
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you
His absolute 'shall'?

COMINIUS:
'Twas from the canon.

CORIOLANUS:
'Shall'!
O good but most unwise patricians! why,
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Given Hydra here to choose an officer,
That with his peremptory 'shall,' being but
The horn and noise o' the monster's, wants not spirit
To say he'll turn your current in a ditch,
And make your channel his? If he have power
Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learn'd,
Be not as common fools; if you are not,
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
If they be senators: and they are no less,
When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,'
His popular 'shall' against a graver bench
Than ever frown in Greece. By Jove himself!
It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither supreme, how soon confusion
May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take
The one by the other.

COMINIUS:
Well, on to the market-place.

CORIOLANUS:
Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth
The corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas used
Sometime in Greece,--

MENENIUS:
Well, well, no more of that.

CORIOLANUS:
Though there the people had more absolute power,
I say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed
The ruin of the state.

BRUTUS:
Why, shall the people give
One that speaks thus their voice?

CORIOLANUS:
I'll give my reasons,
More worthier than their voices. They know the corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
That ne'er did service for't: being press'd to the war,
Even when the navel of the state was touch'd,
They would not thread the gates. This kind of service
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i' the war
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd
Most valour, spoke not for them: the accusation
Which they have often made against the senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the motive
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
How shall this bisson multitude digest
The senate's courtesy? Let deeds express
What's like to be their words: 'we did request it;
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
They gave us our demands.' Thus we debase
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
Call our cares fears; which will in time
Break ope the locks o' the senate and bring in
The crows to peck the eagles.

MENENIUS:
Come, enough.

BRUTUS:
Enough, with over-measure.

CORIOLANUS:
No, take more:
What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
Seal what I end withal! This double worship,
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom,
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of general ignorance,--it must omit
Real necessities, and give way the while
To unstable slightness: purpose so barr'd,
it follows,
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech you,--
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
That love the fundamental part of state
More than you doubt the change on't, that prefer
A noble life before a long, and wish
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
That's sure of death without it, at once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
The sweet which is their poison: your dishonour
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
Of that integrity which should become't,
Not having the power to do the good it would,
For the in which doth control't.

BRUTUS:
Has said enough.

SICINIUS:
Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer
As traitors do.

CORIOLANUS:
Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee!
What should the people do with these bald tribunes?
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To the greater bench: in a rebellion,
When what's not meet, but what must be, was law,
Then were they chosen: in a better hour,
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
And throw their power i' the dust.

BRUTUS:
Manifest treason!

SICINIUS:
This a consul? no.

BRUTUS:
The aediles, ho!
Let him be apprehended.

SICINIUS:
Go, call the people:
in whose name myself
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.

CORIOLANUS:
Hence, old goat!

Senators, &C:
We'll surety him.

COMINIUS:
Aged sir, hands off.

CORIOLANUS:
Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy garments.

SICINIUS:
Help, ye citizens!

MENENIUS:
On both sides more respect.

SICINIUS:
Here's he that would take from you all your power.

BRUTUS:
Seize him, AEdiles!

Citizens:
Down with him! down with him!

Senators, &C:
Weapons, weapons, weapons!
'Tribunes!' 'Patricians!' 'Citizens!' 'What, ho!'
'Sicinius!' 'Brutus!' 'Coriolanus!' 'Citizens!'
'Peace, peace, peace!' 'Stay, hold, peace!'

MENENIUS:
What is about to be? I am out of breath;
Confusion's near; I cannot speak. You, tribunes
To the people! Coriolanus, patience!
Speak, good Sicinius.

SICINIUS:
Hear me, people; peace!

Citizens:
Let's hear our tribune: peace Speak, speak, speak.

SICINIUS:
You are at point to lose your liberties:
Marcius would have all from you; Marcius,
Whom late you have named for consul.

MENENIUS:
Fie, fie, fie!
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.

First Senator:
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.

SICINIUS:
What is the city but the people?

Citizens:
True,
The people are the city.

BRUTUS:
By the consent of all, we were establish'd
The people's magistrates.

Citizens:
You so remain.

MENENIUS:
And so are like to do.

COMINIUS:
That is the way to lay the city flat;
To bring the roof to the foundation,
And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges,
In heaps and piles of ruin.

SICINIUS:
This deserves death.

BRUTUS:
Or let us stand to our authority,
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Upon the part o' the people, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy
Of present death.

SICINIUS:
Therefore lay hold of him;
Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.

BRUTUS:
AEdiles, seize him!

Citizens:
Yield, Marcius, yield!

MENENIUS:
Hear me one word;
Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.

AEdile:
Peace, peace!

MENENIUS:

BRUTUS:
Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the rock.

CORIOLANUS:
No, I'll die here.
There's some among you have beheld me fighting:
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.

MENENIUS:
Down with that sword! Tribunes, withdraw awhile.

BRUTUS:
Lay hands upon him.

COMINIUS:
Help Marcius, help,
You that be noble; help him, young and old!

Citizens:
Down with him, down with him!

MENENIUS:
Go, get you to your house; be gone, away!
All will be naught else.

Second Senator:
Get you gone.

COMINIUS:
Stand fast;
We have as many friends as enemies.

MENENIUS:
Sham it be put to that?

First Senator:
The gods forbid!
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
Leave us to cure this cause.

MENENIUS:
For 'tis a sore upon us,
You cannot tent yourself: be gone, beseech you.

COMINIUS:
Come, sir, along with us.

CORIOLANUS:
I would they were barbarians--as they are,
Though in Rome litter'd--not Romans--as they are not,
Though calved i' the porch o' the Capitol--

MENENIUS:
Be gone;
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue;
One time will owe another.

CORIOLANUS:
On fair ground
I could beat forty of them.

COMINIUS:
I could myself
Take up a brace o' the best of them; yea, the
two tribunes:
But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic;
And manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands
Against a falling fabric. Will you hence,
Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters and o'erbear
What they are used to bear.

MENENIUS:
Pray you, be gone:
I'll try whether my old wit be in request
With those that have but little: this must be patch'd
With cloth of any colour.

COMINIUS:
Nay, come away.

A Patrician:
This man has marr'd his fortune.

MENENIUS:
His nature is too noble for the world:
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,
Or Jove for's power to thunder. His heart's his mouth:
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent;
And, being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death.
Here's goodly work!

Second Patrician:
I would they were abed!

MENENIUS:
I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance!
Could he not speak 'em fair?

SICINIUS:
Where is this viper
That would depopulate the city and
Be every man himself?

MENENIUS:
You worthy tribunes,--

SICINIUS:
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands: he hath resisted law,
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
Than the severity of the public power
Which he so sets at nought.

First Citizen:
He shall well know
The noble tribunes are the people's mouths,
And we their hands.

Citizens:
He shall, sure on't.

MENENIUS:
Sir, sir,--

SICINIUS:
Peace!

MENENIUS:
Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.

SICINIUS:
Sir, how comes't that you
Have holp to make this rescue?

MENENIUS:
Hear me speak:
As I do know the consul's worthiness,
So can I name his faults,--

SICINIUS:
Consul! what consul?

MENENIUS:
The consul Coriolanus.

BRUTUS:
He consul!

Citizens:
No, no, no, no, no.

MENENIUS:
If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two;
The which shall turn you to no further harm
Than so much loss of time.

SICINIUS:
Speak briefly then;
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This viperous traitor: to eject him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death: therefore it is decreed
He dies to-night.

MENENIUS:
Now the good gods forbid
That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude
Towards her deserved children is enroll'd
In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam
Should now eat up her own!

SICINIUS:
He's a disease that must be cut away.

MENENIUS:
O, he's a limb that has but a disease;
Mortal, to cut it off; to cure it, easy.
What has he done to Rome that's worthy death?
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost--
Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath,
By many an ounce--he dropp'd it for his country;
And what is left, to lose it by his country,
Were to us all, that do't and suffer it,
A brand to the end o' the world.

SICINIUS:
This is clean kam.

BRUTUS:
Merely awry: when he did love his country,
It honour'd him.

MENENIUS:
The service of the foot
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.

BRUTUS:
We'll hear no more.
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence:
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
Spread further.

MENENIUS:
One word more, one word.
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
The harm of unscann'd swiftness, will too late
Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Proceed by process;
Lest parties, as he is beloved, break out,
And sack great Rome with Romans.

BRUTUS:
If it were so,--

SICINIUS:
What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of his obedience?
Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.

MENENIUS:
Consider this: he has been bred i' the wars
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd
In bolted language; meal and bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
I'll go to him, and undertake to bring him
Where he shall answer, by a lawful form,
In peace, to his utmost peril.

First Senator:
Noble tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.

SICINIUS:
Noble Menenius,
Be you then as the people's officer.
Masters, lay down your weapons.

BRUTUS:
Go not home.

SICINIUS:
Meet on the market-place. We'll attend you there:
Where, if you bring not Marcius, we'll proceed
In our first way.

MENENIUS:
I'll bring him to you.
Let me desire your company: he must come,
Or what is worst will follow.

First Senator:
Pray you, let's to him.

CORIOLANUS:
Let them puff all about mine ears, present me
Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still
Be thus to them.

A Patrician:
You do the nobler.

CORIOLANUS:
I muse my mother
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them woollen vassals, things created
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
In congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder,
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of peace or war.
I talk of you:
Why did you wish me milder? would you have me
False to my nature? Rather say I play
The man I am.

VOLUMNIA:
O, sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on,
Before you had worn it out.

CORIOLANUS:
Let go.

VOLUMNIA:
You might have been enough the man you are,
With striving less to be so; lesser had been
The thwartings of your dispositions, if
You had not show'd them how ye were disposed
Ere they lack'd power to cross you.

CORIOLANUS:
Let them hang.

A Patrician:
Ay, and burn too.

MENENIUS:
Come, come, you have been too rough, something
too rough;
You must return and mend it.

First Senator:
There's no remedy;
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst, and perish.

VOLUMNIA:
Pray, be counsell'd:
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
To better vantage.

MENENIUS:
Well said, noble woman?
Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that
The violent fit o' the time craves it as physic
For the whole state, I would put mine armour on,
Which I can scarcely bear.

CORIOLANUS:
What must I do?

MENENIUS:
Return to the tribunes.

CORIOLANUS:
Well, what then? what then?

MENENIUS:
Repent what you have spoke.

CORIOLANUS:
For them! I cannot do it to the gods;
Must I then do't to them?

VOLUMNIA:
You are too absolute;
Though therein you can never be too noble,
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say,
Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends,
I' the war do grow together: grant that, and tell me,
In peace what each of them by the other lose,
That they combine not there.

CORIOLANUS:
Tush, tush!

MENENIUS:
A good demand.

VOLUMNIA:
If it be honour in your wars to seem
The same you are not, which, for your best ends,
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse,
That it shall hold companionship in peace
With honour, as in war, since that to both
It stands in like request?

CORIOLANUS:
Why force you this?

VOLUMNIA:
Because that now it lies you on to speak
To the people; not by your own instruction,
Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but rooted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosom's truth.
Now, this no more dishonours you at all
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my nature where
My fortunes and my friends at stake required
I should do so in honour: I am in this,
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
And you will rather show our general louts
How you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em,
For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.

MENENIUS:
Noble lady!
Come, go with us; speak fair: you may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.

VOLUMNIA:
I prithee now, my son,
Go to them, with this bonnet in thy hand;
And thus far having stretch'd it--here be with them--
Thy knee bussing the stones--for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant
More learned than the ears--waving thy head,
Which often, thus, correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
That will not hold the handling: or say to them,
Thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils
Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess,
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,
In asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
As thou hast power and person.

MENENIUS:
This but done,
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free
As words to little purpose.

VOLUMNIA:
Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Than flatter him in a bower. Here is Cominius.

COMINIUS:
I have been i' the market-place; and, sir,'tis fit
You make strong party, or defend yourself
By calmness or by absence: all's in anger.

MENENIUS:
Only fair speech.

COMINIUS:
I think 'twill serve, if he
Can thereto frame his spirit.

VOLUMNIA:
He must, and will
Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.

CORIOLANUS:
Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce?
Must I with base tongue give my noble heart
A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do't:
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it
And throw't against the wind. To the market-place!
You have put me now to such a part which never
I shall discharge to the life.

COMINIUS:
Come, come, we'll prompt you.

VOLUMNIA:
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.

CORIOLANUS:
Well, I must do't:
Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlot's spirit! my throat of war be turn'd,
Which quired with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice
That babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up
The glasses of my sight! a beggar's tongue
Make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees,
Who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms! I will not do't,
Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth
And by my body's action teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.

VOLUMNIA:
At thy choice, then:
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin; let
Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list
Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me,
But owe thy pride thyself.

CORIOLANUS:
Pray, be content:
Mother, I am going to the market-place;
Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going:
Commend me to my wife. I'll return consul;
Or never trust to what my tongue can do
I' the way of flattery further.

VOLUMNIA:
Do your will.

COMINIUS:
Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself
To answer mildly; for they are prepared
With accusations, as I hear, more strong
Than are upon you yet.

CORIOLANUS:
The word is 'mildly.' Pray you, let us go:
Let them accuse me by invention, I
Will answer in mine honour.

MENENIUS:
Ay, but mildly.

CORIOLANUS:
Well, mildly be it then. Mildly!

BRUTUS:
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power: if he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
Was ne'er distributed.
What, will he come?

AEdile:
He's coming.

BRUTUS:
How accompanied?

AEdile:
With old Menenius, and those senators
That always favour'd him.

SICINIUS:
Have you a catalogue
Of all the voices that we have procured
Set down by the poll?

AEdile:
I have; 'tis ready.

SICINIUS:
Have you collected them by tribes?

AEdile:
I have.

SICINIUS:
Assemble presently the people hither;
And when they bear me say 'It shall be so
I' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
If I say fine, cry 'Fine;' if death, cry 'Death.'
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power i' the truth o' the cause.

AEdile:
I shall inform them.

BRUTUS:
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present execution
Of what we chance to sentence.

AEdile:
Very well.

SICINIUS:
Make them be strong and ready for this hint,
When we shall hap to give 't them.

BRUTUS:
Go about it.
Put him to choler straight: he hath been used
Ever to conquer, and to have his worth
Of contradiction: being once chafed, he cannot
Be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks
What's in his heart; and that is there which looks
With us to break his neck.

SICINIUS:
Well, here he comes.

MENENIUS:
Calmly, I do beseech you.

CORIOLANUS:
Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece
Will bear the knave by the volume. The honour'd gods
Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice
Supplied with worthy men! plant love among 's!
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace,
And not our streets with war!

First Senator:
Amen, amen.

MENENIUS:
A noble wish.

SICINIUS:
Draw near, ye people.

AEdile:
List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say!

CORIOLANUS:
First, hear me speak.

Both Tribunes:
Well, say. Peace, ho!

CORIOLANUS:
Shall I be charged no further than this present?
Must all determine here?

SICINIUS:
I do demand,
If you submit you to the people's voices,
Allow their officers and are content
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you?

CORIOLANUS:
I am content.

MENENIUS:
Lo, citizens, he says he is content:
The warlike service he has done, consider; think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like graves i' the holy churchyard.

CORIOLANUS:
Scratches with briers,
Scars to move laughter only.

MENENIUS:
Consider further,
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier: do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier,
Rather than envy you.

COMINIUS:
Well, well, no more.

CORIOLANUS:
What is the matter
That being pass'd for consul with full voice,
I am so dishonour'd that the very hour
You take it off again?

SICINIUS:
Answer to us.

CORIOLANUS:
Say, then: 'tis true, I ought so.

SICINIUS:
We charge you, that you have contrived to take
From Rome all season'd office and to wind
Yourself into a power tyrannical;
For which you are a traitor to the people.

CORIOLANUS:
How! traitor!

MENENIUS:
Nay, temperately; your promise.

CORIOLANUS:
The fires i' the lowest hell fold-in the people!
Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune!
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
In thy hand clutch'd as many millions, in
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
'Thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free
As I do pray the gods.

SICINIUS:
Mark you this, people?

Citizens:
To the rock, to the rock with him!

SICINIUS:
Peace!
We need not put new matter to his charge:
What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
Opposing laws with strokes and here defying
Those whose great power must try him; even this,
So criminal and in such capital kind,
Deserves the extremest death.

BRUTUS:
But since he hath
Served well for Rome,--

CORIOLANUS:
What do you prate of service?

BRUTUS:
I talk of that, that know it.

CORIOLANUS:
You?

MENENIUS:
Is this the promise that you made your mother?

COMINIUS:
Know, I pray you,--

CORIOLANUS:
I know no further:
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word;
Nor cheque my courage for what they can give,
To have't with saying 'Good morrow.'

SICINIUS:
For that he has,
As much as in him lies, from time to time
Envied against the people, seeking means
To pluck away their power, as now at last
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
That do distribute it; in the name o' the people
And in the power of us the tribunes, we,
Even from this instant, banish him our city,
In peril of precipitation
From off the rock Tarpeian never more
To enter our Rome gates: i' the people's name,
I say it shall be so.

Citizens:
It shall be so, it shall be so; let him away:
He's banish'd, and it shall be so.

COMINIUS:
Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,--

SICINIUS:
He's sentenced; no more hearing.

COMINIUS:
Let me speak:
I have been consul, and can show for Rome
Her enemies' marks upon me. I do love
My country's good with a respect more tender,
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase,
And treasure of my loins; then if I would
Speak that,--

SICINIUS:
We know your drift: speak what?

BRUTUS:
There's no more to be said, but he is banish'd,
As enemy to the people and his country:
It shall be so.

Citizens:
It shall be so, it shall be so.

CORIOLANUS:
You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate
As reek o' the rotten fens, whose loves I prize
As the dead carcasses of unburied men
That do corrupt my air, I banish you;
And here remain with your uncertainty!
Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts!
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
To banish your defenders; till at length
Your ignorance, which finds not till it feels,
Making not reservation of yourselves,
Still your own foes, deliver you as most
Abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows! Despising,
For you, the city, thus I turn my back:
There is a world elsewhere.

AEdile:
The people's enemy is gone, is gone!

Citizens:
Our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo!

SICINIUS:
Go, see him out at gates, and follow him,
As he hath followed you, with all despite;
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the city.

Citizens:
Come, come; let's see him out at gates; come.
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.

CORIOLANUS:
Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage? you were used
To say extremity was the trier of spirits;
That common chances common men could bear;
That when the sea was calm all boats alike
Show'd mastership in floating; fortune's blows,
When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves
A noble cunning: you were used to load me
With precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conn'd them.

VIRGILIA:
O heavens! O heavens!

CORIOLANUS:
Nay! prithee, woman,--

VOLUMNIA:
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
And occupations perish!

CORIOLANUS:
What, what, what!
I shall be loved when I am lack'd. Nay, mother.
Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say,
If you had been the wife of Hercules,
Six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved
Your husband so much sweat. Cominius,
Droop not; adieu. Farewell, my wife, my mother:
I'll do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter than a younger man's,
And venomous to thine eyes. My sometime general,
I have seen thee stem, and thou hast oft beheld
Heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women
'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes,
As 'tis to laugh at 'em. My mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace: and
Believe't not lightly--though I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen
Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen--your son
Will or exceed the common or be caught
With cautelous baits and practise.

VOLUMNIA:
My first son.
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee awhile: determine on some course,
More than a wild exposture to each chance
That starts i' the way before thee.

CORIOLANUS:
O the gods!

COMINIUS:
I'll follow thee a month, devise with thee
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
And we of thee: so if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
O'er the vast world to seek a single man,
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
I' the absence of the needer.

CORIOLANUS:
Fare ye well:
Thou hast years upon thee; and thou art too full
Of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one
That's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate.
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
My friends of noble touch, when I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me aught
But what is like me formerly.

MENENIUS:
That's worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep.
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
I'ld with thee every foot.

CORIOLANUS:
Give me thy hand: Come.

SICINIUS:
Bid them all home; he's gone, and we'll no further.
The nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.

BRUTUS:
Now we have shown our power,
Let us seem humbler after it is done
Than when it was a-doing.

SICINIUS:
Bid them home:
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
Stand in their ancient strength.

BRUTUS:
Dismiss them home.
Here comes his mother.

SICINIUS:
Let's not meet her.

BRUTUS:
Why?

SICINIUS:
They say she's mad.

BRUTUS:
They have ta'en note of us: keep on your way.

VOLUMNIA:
O, ye're well met: the hoarded plague o' the gods
Requite your love!

MENENIUS:
Peace, peace; be not so loud.

VOLUMNIA:
If that I could for weeping, you should hear,--
Nay, and you shall hear some.
Will you be gone?

VIRGILIA:

SICINIUS:
Are you mankind?

VOLUMNIA:
Ay, fool; is that a shame? Note but this fool.
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Than thou hast spoken words?

SICINIUS:
O blessed heavens!

VOLUMNIA:
More noble blows than ever thou wise words;
And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what; yet go:
Nay, but thou shalt stay too: I would my son
Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.

SICINIUS:
What then?

VIRGILIA:
What then!
He'ld make an end of thy posterity.

VOLUMNIA:
Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!

MENENIUS:
Come, come, peace.

SICINIUS:
I would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himself
The noble knot he made.

BRUTUS:
I would he had.

VOLUMNIA:
'I would he had'! 'Twas you incensed the rabble:
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
Will not have earth to know.

BRUTUS:
Pray, let us go.

VOLUMNIA:
Now, pray, sir, get you gone:
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:--
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son--
This lady's husband here, this, do you see--
Whom you have banish'd, does exceed you all.

BRUTUS:
Well, well, we'll leave you.

SICINIUS:
Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her wits?

VOLUMNIA:
Take my prayers with you.
I would the gods had nothing else to do
But to confirm my curses! Could I meet 'em
But once a-day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to't.

MENENIUS:
You have told them home;
And, by my troth, you have cause. You'll sup with me?

VOLUMNIA:
Anger's my meat; I sup upon myself,
And so shall starve with feeding. Come, let's go:
Leave this faint puling and lament as I do,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.

MENENIUS:
Fie, fie, fie!

Roman:
I know you well, sir, and you know
me: your name, I think, is Adrian.

Volsce:
It is so, sir: truly, I have forgot you.

Roman:
I am a Roman; and my services are,
as you are, against 'em: know you me yet?

Volsce:
Nicanor? no.

Roman:
The same, sir.

Volsce:
You had more beard when I last saw you; but your
favour is well approved by your tongue. What's the
news in Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state,
to find you out there: you have well saved me a
day's journey.

Roman:
There hath been in Rome strange insurrections; the
people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.

Volsce:
Hath been! is it ended, then? Our state thinks not
so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and
hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.

Roman:
The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing
would make it flame again: for the nobles receive
so to heart the banishment of that worthy
Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take
all power from the people and to pluck from them
their tribunes for ever. This lies glowing, I can
tell you, and is almost mature for the violent
breaking out.

Volsce:
Coriolanus banished!

Roman:
Banished, sir.

Volsce:
You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.

Roman:
The day serves well for them now. I have heard it
said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is
when she's fallen out with her husband. Your noble
Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his
great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request
of his country.

Volsce:
He cannot choose. I am most fortunate, thus
accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my
business, and I will merrily accompany you home.

Roman:
I shall, between this and supper, tell you most
strange things from Rome; all tending to the good of
their adversaries. Have you an army ready, say you?

Volsce:
A most royal one; the centurions and their charges,
distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment,
and to be on foot at an hour's warning.

Roman:
I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the
man, I think, that shall set them in present action.
So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.

Volsce:
You take my part from me, sir; I have the most cause
to be glad of yours.

Roman:
Well, let us go together.

CORIOLANUS:
A goodly city is this Antium. City,
'Tis I that made thy widows: many an heir
Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars
Have I heard groan and drop: then know me not,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
In puny battle slay me.
Save you, sir.

Citizen:
And you.

CORIOLANUS:
Direct me, if it be your will,
Where great Aufidius lies: is he in Antium?

Citizen:
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
At his house this night.

CORIOLANUS:
Which is his house, beseech you?

Citizen:
This, here before you.

CORIOLANUS:
Thank you, sir: farewell.
O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart,
Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise,
Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep,
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
My birth-place hate I, and my love's upon
This enemy town. I'll enter: if he slay me,
He does fair justice; if he give me way,
I'll do his country service.

First Servingman:
Wine, wine, wine! What service
is here! I think our fellows are asleep.

Second Servingman:
Where's Cotus? my master calls
for him. Cotus!

CORIOLANUS:
A goodly house: the feast smells well; but I
Appear not like a guest.

First Servingman:
What would you have, friend? whence are you?
Here's no place for you: pray, go to the door.

CORIOLANUS:
I have deserved no better entertainment,
In being Coriolanus.

Second Servingman:
Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his
head; that he gives entrance to such companions?
Pray, get you out.

CORIOLANUS:
Away!

Second Servingman:
Away! get you away.

CORIOLANUS:
Now thou'rt troublesome.

Second Servingman:
Are you so brave? I'll have you talked with anon.

Third Servingman:
What fellow's this?

First Servingman:
A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him
out of the house: prithee, call my master to him.

Third Servingman:
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid
the house.

CORIOLANUS:
Let me but stand; I will not hurt your hearth.

Third Servingman:
What are you?

CORIOLANUS:
A gentleman.

Third Servingman:
A marvellous poor one.

CORIOLANUS:
True, so I am.

Third Servingman:
Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
station; here's no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.

CORIOLANUS:
Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.

Third Servingman:
What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what a
strange guest he has here.

Second Servingman:
And I shall.

Third Servingman:
Where dwellest thou?

CORIOLANUS:
Under the canopy.

Third Servingman:
Under the canopy!

CORIOLANUS:
Ay.

Third Servingman:
Where's that?

CORIOLANUS:
I' the city of kites and crows.

Third Servingman:
I' the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is!
Then thou dwellest with daws too?

CORIOLANUS:
No, I serve not thy master.

Third Servingman:
How, sir! do you meddle with my master?

CORIOLANUS:
Ay; 'tis an honester service than to meddle with thy
mistress. Thou pratest, and pratest; serve with thy
trencher, hence!

AUFIDIUS:
Where is this fellow?

Second Servingman:
Here, sir: I'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for
disturbing the lords within.

AUFIDIUS:
Whence comest thou? what wouldst thou? thy name?
Why speak'st not? speak, man: what's thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
If, Tullus,
Not yet thou knowest me, and, seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself.

AUFIDIUS:
What is thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears,
And harsh in sound to thine.

AUFIDIUS:
Say, what's thy name?
Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in't; though thy tackle's torn.
Thou show'st a noble vessel: what's thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
Prepare thy brow to frown: know'st
thou me yet?

AUFIDIUS:
I know thee not: thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
My name is Caius Marcius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
My surname, Coriolanus: the painful service,
The extreme dangers and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country are requited
But with that surname; a good memory,
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me: only that name remains;
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest;
And suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be
Whoop'd out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth; not out of hope--
Mistake me not--to save my life, for if
I had fear'd death, of all the men i' the world
I would have 'voided thee, but in mere spite,
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy country, speed
thee straight,
And make my misery serve thy turn: so use it
That my revengeful services may prove
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Against my canker'd country with the spleen
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Thou darest not this and that to prove more fortunes
Thou'rt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary, and present
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice;
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
Since I have ever follow'd thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.

AUFIDIUS:
O Marcius, Marcius!
Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart
A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter
Should from yond cloud speak divine things,
And say 'Tis true,' I'ld not believe them more
Than thee, all noble Marcius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, where against
My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
And scarr'd the moon with splinters: here I clip
The anvil of my sword, and do contest
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
As ever in ambitious strength I did
Contend against thy valour. Know thou first,
I loved the maid I married; never man
Sigh'd truer breath; but that I see thee here,
Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars! I tell thee,
We have a power on foot; and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn,
Or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me;
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Marcius,
Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that
Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all
From twelve to seventy, and pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood o'er-bear. O, come, go in,
And take our friendly senators by the hands;
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your territories,
Though not for Rome itself.

CORIOLANUS:
You bless me, gods!

AUFIDIUS:
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own revenges, take
The one half of my commission; and set down--
As best thou art experienced, since thou know'st
Thy country's strength and weakness,--thine own ways;
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote,
To fright them, ere destroy. But come in:
Let me commend thee first to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
And more a friend than e'er an enemy;
Yet, Marcius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome!

First Servingman:
Here's a strange alteration!

Second Servingman:
By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him with
a cudgel; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a
false report of him.

First Servingman:
What an arm he has! he turned me about with his
finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.

Second Servingman:
Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in
him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,--I
cannot tell how to term it.

First Servingman:
He had so; looking as it were--would I were hanged,
but I thought there was more in him than I could think.

Second Servingman:
So did I, I'll be sworn: he is simply the rarest
man i' the world.

First Servingman:
I think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.

Second Servingman:
Who, my master?

First Servingman:
Nay, it's no matter for that.

Second Servingman:
Worth six on him.

First Servingman:
Nay, not so neither: but I take him to be the
greater soldier.

Second Servingman:
Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that:
for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.

First Servingman:
Ay, and for an assault too.

Third Servingman:
O slaves, I can tell you news,-- news, you rascals!

First Servingman:
What, what, what? let's partake.

Third Servingman:
I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had as
lieve be a condemned man.

First Servingman:
Wherefore? wherefore?

Third Servingman:
Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general,
Caius Marcius.

First Servingman:
Why do you say 'thwack our general '?

Third Servingman:
I do not say 'thwack our general;' but he was always
good enough for him.

Second Servingman:
Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too
hard for him; I have heard him say so himself.

First Servingman:
He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth
on't: before Corioli he scotched him and notched
him like a carbon ado.

Second Servingman:
An he had been cannibally given, he might have
broiled and eaten him too.

First Servingman:
But, more of thy news?

Third Servingman:
Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son
and heir to Mars; set at upper end o' the table; no
question asked him by any of the senators, but they
stand bald before him: our general himself makes a
mistress of him: sanctifies himself with's hand and
turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. But
the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i'
the middle and but one half of what he was
yesterday; for the other has half, by the entreaty
and grant of the whole table. He'll go, he says,
and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he
will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.

Second Servingman:
And he's as like to do't as any man I can imagine.

Third Servingman:
Do't! he will do't; for, look you, sir, he has as
many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it
were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as
we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.

First Servingman:
Directitude! what's that?

Third Servingman:
But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again,
and the man in blood, they will out of their
burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with
him.

First Servingman:
But when goes this forward?

Third Servingman:
To-morrow; to-day; presently; you shall have the
drum struck up this afternoon: 'tis, as it were, a
parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they
wipe their lips.

Second Servingman:
Why, then we shall have a stirring world again.
This peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase
tailors, and breed ballad-makers.

First Servingman:
Let me have war, say I; it exceeds peace as far as
day does night; it's spritely, waking, audible, and
full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy;
mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter of more
bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.

Second Servingman:
'Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to
be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a
great maker of cuckolds.

First Servingman:
Ay, and it makes men hate one another.

Third Servingman:
Reason; because they then less need one another.
The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap
as Volscians. They are rising, they are rising.

All:
In, in, in, in!

SICINIUS:
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him;
His remedies are tame i' the present peace
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by't, behold
Dissentious numbers pestering streets than see
Our tradesmen with in their shops and going
About their functions friendly.

BRUTUS:
We stood to't in good time.
Is this Menenius?

SICINIUS:
'Tis he,'tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.

Both Tribunes:
Hail sir!

MENENIUS:
Hail to you both!

SICINIUS:
Your Coriolanus
Is not much miss'd, but with his friends:
The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do,
Were he more angry at it.

MENENIUS:
All's well; and might have been much better, if
He could have temporized.

SICINIUS:
Where is he, hear you?

MENENIUS:
Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife
Hear nothing from him.

Citizens:
The gods preserve you both!

SICINIUS:
God-den, our neighbours.

BRUTUS:
God-den to you all, god-den to you all.

First Citizen:
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees,
Are bound to pray for you both.

SICINIUS:
Live, and thrive!

BRUTUS:
Farewell, kind neighbours: we wish'd Coriolanus
Had loved you as we did.

Citizens:
Now the gods keep you!

Both Tribunes:
Farewell, farewell.

SICINIUS:
This is a happier and more comely time
Than when these fellows ran about the streets,
Crying confusion.

BRUTUS:
Caius Marcius was
A worthy officer i' the war; but insolent,
O'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,
Self-loving,--

SICINIUS:
And affecting one sole throne,
Without assistance.

MENENIUS:
I think not so.

SICINIUS:
We should by this, to all our lamentation,
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.

BRUTUS:
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still without him.

AEdile:
Worthy tribunes,
There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
Reports, the Volsces with two several powers
Are enter'd in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before 'em.

MENENIUS:
'Tis Aufidius,
Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world;
Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.

SICINIUS:
Come, what talk you
Of Marcius?

BRUTUS:
Go see this rumourer whipp'd. It cannot be
The Volsces dare break with us.

MENENIUS:
Cannot be!
We have record that very well it can,
And three examples of the like have been
Within my age. But reason with the fellow,
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.

SICINIUS:
Tell not me:
I know this cannot be.

BRUTUS:
Not possible.

Messenger:
The nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the senate-house: some news is come
That turns their countenances.

SICINIUS:
'Tis this slave;--
Go whip him, 'fore the people's eyes:--his raising;
Nothing but his report.

Messenger:
Yes, worthy sir,
The slave's report is seconded; and more,
More fearful, is deliver'd.

SICINIUS:
What more fearful?

Messenger:
It is spoke freely out of many mouths--
How probable I do not know--that Marcius,
Join'd with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome,
And vows revenge as spacious as between
The young'st and oldest thing.

SICINIUS:
This is most likely!

BRUTUS:
Raised only, that the weaker sort may wish
Good Marcius home again.

SICINIUS:
The very trick on't.

MENENIUS:
This is unlikely:
He and Aufidius can no more atone
Than violentest contrariety.

Second Messenger:
You are sent for to the senate:
A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius
Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories; and have already
O'erborne their way, consumed with fire, and took
What lay before them.

COMINIUS:
O, you have made good work!

MENENIUS:
What news? what news?

COMINIUS:
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
To see your wives dishonour'd to your noses,--

MENENIUS:
What's the news? what's the news?

COMINIUS:
Your temples burned in their cement, and
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an auger's bore.

MENENIUS:
Pray now, your news?
You have made fair work, I fear me.--Pray, your news?--
If Marcius should be join'd with Volscians,--

COMINIUS:
If!
He is their god: he leads them like a thing
Made by some other deity than nature,
That shapes man better; and they follow him,
Against us brats, with no less confidence
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies,
Or butchers killing flies.

MENENIUS:
You have made good work,
You and your apron-men; you that stood so up much
on the voice of occupation and
The breath of garlic-eaters!

COMINIUS:
He will shake
Your Rome about your ears.

MENENIUS:
As Hercules
Did shake down mellow fruit.
You have made fair work!

BRUTUS:
But is this true, sir?

COMINIUS:
Ay; and you'll look pale
Before you find it other. All the regions
Do smilingly revolt; and who resist
Are mock'd for valiant ignorance,
And perish constant fools. Who is't can blame him?
Your enemies and his find something in him.

MENENIUS:
We are all undone, unless
The noble man have mercy.

COMINIUS:
Who shall ask it?
The tribunes cannot do't for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they
Should say 'Be good to Rome,' they charged him even
As those should do that had deserved his hate,
And therein show'd like enemies.

MENENIUS:
'Tis true:
If he were putting to my house the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say 'Beseech you, cease.' You have made fair hands,
You and your crafts! you have crafted fair!

COMINIUS:
You have brought
A trembling upon Rome, such as was never
So incapable of help.

Both Tribunes:
Say not we brought it.

MENENIUS:
How! Was it we? we loved him but, like beasts
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
Who did hoot him out o' the city.

COMINIUS:
But I fear
They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his officer: desperation
Is all the policy, strength and defence,
That Rome can make against them.

MENENIUS:
Here come the clusters.
And is Aufidius with him? You are they
That made the air unwholesome, when you cast
Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at
Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming;
And not a hair upon a soldier's head
Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs
As you threw caps up will he tumble down,
And pay you for your voices. 'Tis no matter;
if he could burn us all into one coal,
We have deserved it.

Citizens:
Faith, we hear fearful news.

First Citizen:
For mine own part,
When I said, banish him, I said 'twas pity.

Second Citizen:
And so did I.

Third Citizen:
And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very
many of us: that we did, we did for the best; and
though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet
it was against our will.

COMINIUS:
Ye re goodly things, you voices!

MENENIUS:
You have made
Good work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?

COMINIUS:
O, ay, what else?

SICINIUS:
Go, masters, get you home; be not dismay'd:
These are a side that would be glad to have
This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of fear.

First Citizen:
The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let's home.
I ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished
him.

Second Citizen:
So did we all. But, come, let's home.

BRUTUS:
I do not like this news.

SICINIUS:
Nor I.

BRUTUS:
Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie!

SICINIUS:
Pray, let us go.

AUFIDIUS:
Do they still fly to the Roman?

Lieutenant:
I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but
Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
And you are darken'd in this action, sir,
Even by your own.

AUFIDIUS:
I cannot help it now,
Unless, by using means, I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, than I thought he would
When first I did embrace him: yet his nature
In that's no changeling; and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.

Lieutenant:
Yet I wish, sir,--
I mean for your particular,--you had not
Join'd in commission with him; but either
Had borne the action of yourself, or else
To him had left it solely.

AUFIDIUS:
I understand thee well; and be thou sure,
when he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him. Although it seems,
And so he thinks, and is no less apparent
To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly.
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon
As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine,
Whene'er we come to our account.

Lieutenant:
Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?

AUFIDIUS:
All places yield to him ere he sits down;
And the nobility of Rome are his:
The senators and patricians love him too:
The tribunes are no soldiers; and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
By sovereignty of nature. First he was
A noble servant to them; but he could not
Carry his honours even: whether 'twas pride,
Which out of daily fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace
Even with the same austerity and garb
As he controll'd the war; but one of these--
As he hath spices of them all, not all,
For I dare so far free him--made him fear'd,
So hated, and so banish'd: but he has a merit,
To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues
Lie in the interpretation of the time:
And power, unto itself most commendable,
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
To extol what it hath done.
One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail;
Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.
Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.

MENENIUS:
No, I'll not go: you hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his general; who loved him
In a most dear particular. He call'd me father:
But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him;
A mile before his tent fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd
To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.

COMINIUS:
He would not seem to know me.

MENENIUS:
Do you hear?

COMINIUS:
Yet one time he did call me by my name:
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. Coriolanus
He would not answer to: forbad all names;
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Till he had forged himself a name o' the fire
Of burning Rome.

MENENIUS:
Why, so: you have made good work!
A pair of tribunes that have rack'd for Rome,
To make coals cheap,--a noble memory!

COMINIUS:
I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon
When it was less expected: he replied,
It was a bare petition of a state
To one whom they had punish'd.

MENENIUS:
Very well:
Could he say less?

COMINIUS:
I offer'd to awaken his regard
For's private friends: his answer to me was,
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Of noisome musty chaff: he said 'twas folly,
For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt,
And still to nose the offence.

MENENIUS:
For one poor grain or two!
I am one of those; his mother, wife, his child,
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains:
You are the musty chaff; and you are smelt
Above the moon: we must be burnt for you.

SICINIUS:
Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid
In this so never-needed help, yet do not
Upbraid's with our distress. But, sure, if you
Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,
More than the instant army we can make,
Might stop our countryman.

MENENIUS:
No, I'll not meddle.

SICINIUS:
Pray you, go to him.

MENENIUS:
What should I do?

BRUTUS:
Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome, towards Marcius.

MENENIUS:
Well, and say that Marcius
Return me, as Cominius is return'd,
Unheard; what then?
But as a discontented friend, grief-shot
With his unkindness? say't be so?

SICINIUS:
Yet your good will
must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure
As you intended well.

MENENIUS:
I'll undertake 't:
I think he'll hear me. Yet, to bite his lip
And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me.
He was not taken well; he had not dined:
The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuff'd
These and these conveyances of our blood
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
Than in our priest-like fasts: therefore I'll watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then I'll set upon him.

BRUTUS:
You know the very road into his kindness,
And cannot lose your way.

MENENIUS:
Good faith, I'll prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge
Of my success.

COMINIUS:
He'll never hear him.

SICINIUS:
Not?

COMINIUS:
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
Red as 'twould burn Rome; and his injury
The gaoler to his pity. I kneel'd before him;
'Twas very faintly he said 'Rise;' dismiss'd me
Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do,
He sent in writing after me; what he would not,
Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions:
So that all hope is vain.
Unless his noble mother, and his wife;
Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
For mercy to his country. Therefore, let's hence,
And with our fair entreaties haste them on.

First Senator:
Stay: whence are you?

Second Senator:
Stand, and go back.

MENENIUS:
You guard like men; 'tis well: but, by your leave,
I am an officer of state, and come
To speak with Coriolanus.

First Senator:
From whence?

MENENIUS:
From Rome.

First Senator:
You may not pass, you must return: our general
Will no more hear from thence.

Second Senator:
You'll see your Rome embraced with fire before
You'll speak with Coriolanus.

MENENIUS:
Good my friends,
If you have heard your general talk of Rome,
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,
My name hath touch'd your ears it is Menenius.

First Senator:
Be it so; go back: the virtue of your name
Is not here passable.

MENENIUS:
I tell thee, fellow,
The general is my lover: I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His name unparallel'd, haply amplified;
For I have ever verified my friends,
Of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
I have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise
Have almost stamp'd the leasing: therefore, fellow,
I must have leave to pass.

First Senator:
Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his
behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you
should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous
to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.

MENENIUS:
Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,
always factionary on the party of your general.

Second Senator:
Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you
have, I am one that, telling true under him, must
say, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.

MENENIUS:
Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not
speak with him till after dinner.

First Senator:
You are a Roman, are you?

MENENIUS:
I am, as thy general is.

First Senator:
Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you,
when you have pushed out your gates the very
defender of them, and, in a violent popular
ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to
front his revenges with the easy groans of old
women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with
the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as
you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the
intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with
such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived;
therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your
execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn
you out of reprieve and pardon.

MENENIUS:
Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would
use me with estimation.

Second Senator:
Come, my captain knows you not.

MENENIUS:
I mean, thy general.

First Senator:
My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go; lest
I let forth your half-pint of blood; back,--that's
the utmost of your having: back.

MENENIUS:
Nay, but, fellow, fellow,--

CORIOLANUS:
What's the matter?

MENENIUS:
Now, you companion, I'll say an errand for you:
You shall know now that I am in estimation; you shall
perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from
my son Coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment
with him, if thou standest not i' the state of
hanging, or of some death more long in
spectatorship, and crueller in suffering; behold now
presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee.
The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy
particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than
thy old father Menenius does! O my son, my son!
thou art preparing fire for us; look thee, here's
water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to
thee; but being assured none but myself could move
thee, I have been blown out of your gates with
sighs; and conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy
petitionary countrymen. The good gods assuage thy
wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet
here,--this, who, like a block, hath denied my
access to thee.

CORIOLANUS:
Away!

MENENIUS:
How! away!

CORIOLANUS:
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Are servanted to others: though I owe
My revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather
Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone.
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,
Take this along; I writ it for thy sake
And would have rent it. Another word, Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius,
Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st!

AUFIDIUS:
You keep a constant temper.

First Senator:
Now, sir, is your name Menenius?

Second Senator:
'Tis a spell, you see, of much power: you know the
way home again.

First Senator:
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your
greatness back?

Second Senator:
What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?

MENENIUS:
I neither care for the world nor your general: for
such things as you, I can scarce think there's any,
ye're so slight. He that hath a will to die by
himself fears it not from another: let your general
do his worst. For you, be that you are, long; and
your misery increase with your age! I say to you,
as I was said to, Away!

First Senator:
A noble fellow, I warrant him.

Second Senator:
The worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, the
oak not to be wind-shaken.

CORIOLANUS:
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly
I have borne this business.

AUFIDIUS:
Only their ends
You have respected; stopp'd your ears against
The general suit of Rome; never admitted
A private whisper, no, not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.

CORIOLANUS:
This last old man,
Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me above the measure of a father;
Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him; for whose old love I have,
Though I show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd
The first conditions, which they did refuse
And cannot now accept; to grace him only
That thought he could do more, a very little
I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits,
Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this?
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time 'tis made? I will not.
My wife comes foremost; then the honour'd mould
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection!
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.
What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes,
Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not
Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows;
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod: and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession, which
Great nature cries 'Deny not.' let the Volsces
Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I'll never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand,
As if a man were author of himself
And knew no other kin.

VIRGILIA:
My lord and husband!

CORIOLANUS:
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.

VIRGILIA:
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.

CORIOLANUS:
Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny; but do not say
For that 'Forgive our Romans.' O, a kiss
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip
Hath virgin'd it e'er since. You gods! I prate,
And the most noble mother of the world
Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth;
Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.

VOLUMNIA:
O, stand up blest!
Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint,
I kneel before thee; and unproperly
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
Between the child and parent.

CORIOLANUS:
What is this?
Your knees to me? to your corrected son?
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun;
Murdering impossibility, to make
What cannot be, slight work.

VOLUMNIA:
Thou art my warrior;
I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?

CORIOLANUS:
The noble sister of Publicola,
The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
That's curdied by the frost from purest snow
And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria!

VOLUMNIA:
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by the interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.

CORIOLANUS:
The god of soldiers,
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou mayst prove
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw,
And saving those that eye thee!

VOLUMNIA:
Your knee, sirrah.

CORIOLANUS:
That's my brave boy!

VOLUMNIA:
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself,
Are suitors to you.

CORIOLANUS:
I beseech you, peace:
Or, if you'ld ask, remember this before:
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate
Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not
To ally my rages and revenges with
Your colder reasons.

VOLUMNIA:
O, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us any thing;
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Which you deny already: yet we will ask;
That, if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.

CORIOLANUS:
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for we'll
Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?

VOLUMNIA:
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither: since that thy sight,
which should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance
with comforts,
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow;
Making the mother, wife and child to see
The son, the husband and the father tearing
His country's bowels out. And to poor we
Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy; for how can we,
Alas, how can we for our country pray.
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
Our comfort in the country. We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win: for either thou
Must, as a foreign recreant, be led
With manacles thorough our streets, or else
triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin,
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortune till
These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy country than to tread--
Trust to't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb,
That brought thee to this world.

VIRGILIA:
Ay, and mine,
That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name
Living to time.

Young MARCIUS:
A' shall not tread on me;
I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.

CORIOLANUS:
Not of a woman's tenderness to be,
Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.
I have sat too long.

VOLUMNIA:
Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us,
As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit
Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces
May say 'This mercy we have show'd;' the Romans,
'This we received;' and each in either side
Give the all-hail to thee and cry 'Be blest
For making up this peace!' Thou know'st, great son,
The end of war's uncertain, but this certain,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name,
Whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses;
Whose chronicle thus writ: 'The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out;
Destroy'd his country, and his name remains
To the ensuing age abhorr'd.' Speak to me, son:
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour,
To imitate the graces of the gods;
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air,
And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:
He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy:
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world
More bound to 's mother; yet here he lets me prate
Like one i' the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life
Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy,
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honour. Say my request's unjust,
And spurn me back: but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee,
That thou restrain'st from me the duty which
To a mother's part belongs. He turns away:
Down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride
Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end;
This is the last: so we will home to Rome,
And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold 's:
This boy, that cannot tell what he would have
But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny 't. Come, let us go:
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother;
His wife is in Corioli and his child
Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch:
I am hush'd until our city be a-fire,
And then I'll speak a little.

CORIOLANUS:
O mother, mother!
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O!
You have won a happy victory to Rome;
But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it,
Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd,
If not most mortal to him. But, let it come.
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius?

AUFIDIUS:
I was moved withal.

CORIOLANUS:
I dare be sworn you were:
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
What peace you'll make, advise me: for my part,
I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you; and pray you,
Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!

AUFIDIUS:

CORIOLANUS:
Ay, by and by;
But we will drink together; and you shall bear
A better witness back than words, which we,
On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd.
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
To have a temple built you: all the swords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace.

MENENIUS:
See you yond coign o' the Capitol, yond
corner-stone?

SICINIUS:
Why, what of that?

MENENIUS:
If it be possible for you to displace it with your
little finger, there is some hope the ladies of
Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him.
But I say there is no hope in't: our throats are
sentenced and stay upon execution.

SICINIUS:
Is't possible that so short a time can alter the
condition of a man!

MENENIUS:
There is differency between a grub and a butterfly;
yet your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown
from man to dragon: he has wings; he's more than a
creeping thing.

SICINIUS:
He loved his mother dearly.

MENENIUS:
So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother
now than an eight-year-old horse. The tartness
of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he
moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before
his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet with
his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a
battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for
Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with
his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity
and a heaven to throne in.

SICINIUS:
Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.

MENENIUS:
I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his
mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy
in him than there is milk in a male tiger; that
shall our poor city find: and all this is long of
you.

SICINIUS:
The gods be good unto us!

MENENIUS:
No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto
us. When we banished him, we respected not them;
and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.

Messenger:
Sir, if you'ld save your life, fly to your house:
The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune
And hale him up and down, all swearing, if
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
They'll give him death by inches.

SICINIUS:
What's the news?

Second Messenger:
Good news, good news; the ladies have prevail'd,
The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone:
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.

SICINIUS:
Friend,
Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?

Second Messenger:
As certain as I know the sun is fire:
Where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it?
Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide,
As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you!
The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes,
Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans,
Make the sun dance. Hark you!

MENENIUS:
This is good news:
I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians,
A city full; of tribunes, such as you,
A sea and land full. You have pray'd well to-day:
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
I'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!

SICINIUS:
First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next,
Accept my thankfulness.

Second Messenger:
Sir, we have all
Great cause to give great thanks.

SICINIUS:
They are near the city?

Second Messenger:
Almost at point to enter.

SICINIUS:
We will meet them,
And help the joy.

First Senator:
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them:
Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother;
Cry 'Welcome, ladies, welcome!'

All:
Welcome, ladies, Welcome!

AUFIDIUS:
Go tell the lords o' the city I am here:
Deliver them this paper: having read it,
Bid them repair to the market place; where I,
Even in theirs and in the commons' ears,
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
The city ports by this hath enter'd and
Intends to appear before the people, hoping
To purge herself with words: dispatch.
Most welcome!

First Conspirator:
How is it with our general?

AUFIDIUS:
Even so
As with a man by his own alms empoison'd,
And with his charity slain.

Second Conspirator:
Most noble sir,
If you do hold the same intent wherein
You wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you
Of your great danger.

AUFIDIUS:
Sir, I cannot tell:
We must proceed as we do find the people.

Third Conspirator:
The people will remain uncertain whilst
'Twixt you there's difference; but the fall of either
Makes the survivor heir of all.

AUFIDIUS:
I know it;
And my pretext to strike at him admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawn'd
Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd,
He water'd his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends; and, to this end,
He bow'd his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unswayable and free.

Third Conspirator:
Sir, his stoutness
When he did stand for consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping,--

AUFIDIUS:
That I would have spoke of:
Being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth;
Presented to my knife his throat: I took him;
Made him joint-servant with me; gave him way
In all his own desires; nay, let him choose
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
My best and freshest men; served his designments
In mine own person; holp to reap the fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do myself this wrong: till, at the last,
I seem'd his follower, not partner, and
He waged me with his countenance, as if
I had been mercenary.

First Conspirator:
So he did, my lord:
The army marvell'd at it, and, in the last,
When he had carried Rome and that we look'd
For no less spoil than glory,--

AUFIDIUS:
There was it:
For which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him.
At a few drops of women's rheum, which are
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour
Of our great action: therefore shall he die,
And I'll renew me in his fall. But, hark!

First Conspirator:
Your native town you enter'd like a post,
And had no welcomes home: but he returns,
Splitting the air with noise.

Second Conspirator:
And patient fools,
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.

Third Conspirator:
Therefore, at your vantage,
Ere he express himself, or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
Which we will second. When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
His reasons with his body.

AUFIDIUS:
Say no more:
Here come the lords.

All The Lords:
You are most welcome home.

AUFIDIUS:
I have not deserved it.
But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?

Lords:
We have.

First Lord:
And grieve to hear't.
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have found easy fines: but there to end
Where he was to begin and give away
The benefit of our levies, answering us
With our own charge, making a treaty where
There was a yielding,--this admits no excuse.

AUFIDIUS:
He approaches: you shall hear him.

CORIOLANUS:
Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier,
No more infected with my country's love
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Under your great command. You are to know
That prosperously I have attempted and
With bloody passage led your wars even to
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home
Do more than counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the action. We have made peace
With no less honour to the Antiates
Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver,
Subscribed by the consuls and patricians,
Together with the seal o' the senate, what
We have compounded on.

AUFIDIUS:
Read it not, noble lords;
But tell the traitor, in the high'st degree
He hath abused your powers.

CORIOLANUS:
Traitor! how now!

AUFIDIUS:
Ay, traitor, Marcius!

CORIOLANUS:
Marcius!

AUFIDIUS:
Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think
I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name
Coriolanus in Corioli?
You lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously
He has betray'd your business, and given up,
For certain drops of salt, your city Rome,
I say 'your city,' to his wife and mother;
Breaking his oath and resolution like
A twist of rotten silk, never admitting
Counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears
He whined and roar'd away your victory,
That pages blush'd at him and men of heart
Look'd wondering each at other.

CORIOLANUS:
Hear'st thou, Mars?

AUFIDIUS:
Name not the god, thou boy of tears!

CORIOLANUS:
Ha!

AUFIDIUS:
No more.

CORIOLANUS:
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave!
Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever
I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords,
Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion--
Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him; that
Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join
To thrust the lie unto him.

First Lord:
Peace, both, and hear me speak.

CORIOLANUS:
Cut me to pieces, Volsces; men and lads,
Stain all your edges on me. Boy! false hound!
If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there,
That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I
Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli:
Alone I did it. Boy!

AUFIDIUS:
Why, noble lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
'Fore your own eyes and ears?

All Conspirators:
Let him die for't.

All The People:
'Tear him to pieces.' 'Do it presently.' 'He kill'd
my son.' 'My daughter.' 'He killed my cousin
Marcus.' 'He killed my father.'

Second Lord:
Peace, ho! no outrage: peace!
The man is noble and his fame folds-in
This orb o' the earth. His last offences to us
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
And trouble not the peace.

CORIOLANUS:
O that I had him,
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
To use my lawful sword!

AUFIDIUS:
Insolent villain!

All Conspirators:
Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!

Lords:
Hold, hold, hold, hold!

AUFIDIUS:
My noble masters, hear me speak.

First Lord:
O Tullus,--

Second Lord:
Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.

Third Lord:
Tread not upon him. Masters all, be quiet;
Put up your swords.

AUFIDIUS:
My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage,
Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger
Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours
To call me to your senate, I'll deliver
Myself your loyal servant, or endure
Your heaviest censure.

First Lord:
Bear from hence his body;
And mourn you for him: let him be regarded
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Did follow to his urn.

Second Lord:
His own impatience
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Let's make the best of it.

AUFIDIUS:
My rage is gone;
And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up.
Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers; I'll be one.
Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully:
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.

GLOUCESTER:
Now is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by this sun of York;
And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
Grim-visaged war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front;
And now, instead of mounting barded steeds
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;
I, that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty
To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
I, that am curtail'd of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
Deformed, unfinish'd, sent before my time
Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionable
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them;
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to spy my shadow in the sun
And descant on mine own deformity:
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
I am determined to prove a villain
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams,
To set my brother Clarence and the king
In deadly hate the one against the other:
And if King Edward be as true and just
As I am subtle, false and treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mew'd up,
About a prophecy, which says that 'G'
Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here
Clarence comes.
Brother, good day; what means this armed guard
That waits upon your grace?

CLARENCE:
His majesty
Tendering my person's safety, hath appointed
This conduct to convey me to the Tower.

GLOUCESTER:
Upon what cause?

CLARENCE:
Because my name is George.

GLOUCESTER:
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours;
He should, for that, commit your godfathers:
O, belike his majesty hath some intent
That you shall be new-christen'd in the Tower.
But what's the matter, Clarence?  may I know?

CLARENCE:
Yea, Richard, when I know; for I protest
As yet I do not: but, as I can learn,
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams;
And from the cross-row plucks the letter G.
And says a wizard told him that by G
His issue disinherited should be;
And, for my name of George begins with G,
It follows in his thought that I am he.
These, as I learn, and such like toys as these
Have moved his highness to commit me now.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, this it is, when men are ruled by women:
'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower:
My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she
That tempers him to this extremity.
Was it not she and that good man of worship,
Anthony Woodville, her brother there,
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,
From whence this present day he is deliver'd?
We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.

CLARENCE:
By heaven, I think there's no man is secure
But the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds
That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore.
Heard ye not what an humble suppliant
Lord hastings was to her for his delivery?

GLOUCESTER:
Humbly complaining to her deity
Got my lord chamberlain his liberty.
I'll tell you what; I think it is our way,
If we will keep in favour with the king,
To be her men and wear her livery:
The jealous o'erworn widow and herself,
Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen.
Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.

BRAKENBURY:
I beseech your graces both to pardon me;
His majesty hath straitly given in charge
That no man shall have private conference,
Of what degree soever, with his brother.

GLOUCESTER:
Even so; an't please your worship, Brakenbury,
You may partake of any thing we say:
We speak no treason, man: we say the king
Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen
Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous;
We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot,
A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue;
And that the queen's kindred are made gentle-folks:
How say you sir? Can you deny all this?

BRAKENBURY:
With this, my lord, myself have nought to do.

GLOUCESTER:
Naught to do with mistress Shore! I tell thee, fellow,
He that doth naught with her, excepting one,
Were best he do it secretly, alone.

BRAKENBURY:
What one, my lord?

GLOUCESTER:
Her husband, knave: wouldst thou betray me?

BRAKENBURY:
I beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal
Forbear your conference with the noble duke.

CLARENCE:
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.

GLOUCESTER:
We are the queen's abjects, and must obey.
Brother, farewell: I will unto the king;
And whatsoever you will employ me in,
Were it to call King Edward's widow sister,
I will perform it to enfranchise you.
Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood
Touches me deeper than you can imagine.

CLARENCE:
I know it pleaseth neither of us well.

GLOUCESTER:
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long;
Meantime, have patience.

CLARENCE:
I must perforce. Farewell.

GLOUCESTER:
Go, tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.
Simple, plain Clarence! I do love thee so,
That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,
If heaven will take the present at our hands.
But who comes here? the new-deliver'd Hastings?

HASTINGS:
Good time of day unto my gracious lord!

GLOUCESTER:
As much unto my good lord chamberlain!
Well are you welcome to the open air.
How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment?

HASTINGS:
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must:
But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment.

GLOUCESTER:
No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too;
For they that were your enemies are his,
And have prevail'd as much on him as you.

HASTINGS:
More pity that the eagle should be mew'd,
While kites and buzzards prey at liberty.

GLOUCESTER:
What news abroad?

HASTINGS:
No news so bad abroad as this at home;
The King is sickly, weak and melancholy,
And his physicians fear him mightily.

GLOUCESTER:
Now, by Saint Paul, this news is bad indeed.
O, he hath kept an evil diet long,
And overmuch consumed his royal person:
'Tis very grievous to be thought upon.
What, is he in his bed?

HASTINGS:
He is.

GLOUCESTER:
Go you before, and I will follow you.
He cannot live, I hope; and must not die
Till George be pack'd with post-horse up to heaven.
I'll in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence,
With lies well steel'd with weighty arguments;
And, if I fall not in my deep intent,
Clarence hath not another day to live:
Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,
And leave the world for me to bustle in!
For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter.
What though I kill'd her husband and her father?
The readiest way to make the wench amends
Is to become her husband and her father:
The which will I; not all so much for love
As for another secret close intent,
By marrying her which I must reach unto.
But yet I run before my horse to market:
Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns:
When they are gone, then must I count my gains.

LADY ANNE:
Set down, set down your honourable load,
If honour may be shrouded in a hearse,
Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament
The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king!
Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster!
Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood!
Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost,
To hear the lamentations of Poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughter'd son,
Stabb'd by the selfsame hand that made these wounds!
Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life,
I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.
Cursed be the hand that made these fatal holes!
Cursed be the heart that had the heart to do it!
Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!
More direful hap betide that hated wretch,
That makes us wretched by the death of thee,
Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads,
Or any creeping venom'd thing that lives!
If ever he have child, abortive be it,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
Whose ugly and unnatural aspect
May fright the hopeful mother at the view;
And that be heir to his unhappiness!
If ever he have wife, let her he made
A miserable by the death of him
As I am made by my poor lord and thee!
Come, now towards Chertsey with your holy load,
Taken from Paul's to be interred there;
And still, as you are weary of the weight,
Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's corse.

GLOUCESTER:
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.

LADY ANNE:
What black magician conjures up this fiend,
To stop devoted charitable deeds?

GLOUCESTER:
Villains, set down the corse; or, by Saint Paul,
I'll make a corse of him that disobeys.

Gentleman:
My lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass.

GLOUCESTER:
Unmanner'd dog! stand thou, when I command:
Advance thy halbert higher than my breast,
Or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike thee to my foot,
And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.

LADY ANNE:
What, do you tremble? are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not; for you are mortal,
And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.
Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!
Thou hadst but power over his mortal body,
His soul thou canst not have; therefore be gone.

GLOUCESTER:
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.

LADY ANNE:
Foul devil, for God's sake, hence, and trouble us not;
For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,
Fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
O, gentlemen, see, see! dead Henry's wounds
Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh!
Blush, Blush, thou lump of foul deformity;
For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood
From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells;
Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural,
Provokes this deluge most unnatural.
O God, which this blood madest, revenge his death!
O earth, which this blood drink'st revenge his death!
Either heaven with lightning strike the
murderer dead,
Or earth, gape open wide and eat him quick,
As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood
Which his hell-govern'd arm hath butchered!

GLOUCESTER:
Lady, you know no rules of charity,
Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.

LADY ANNE:
Villain, thou know'st no law of God nor man:
No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.

GLOUCESTER:
But I know none, and therefore am no beast.

LADY ANNE:
O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!

GLOUCESTER:
More wonderful, when angels are so angry.
Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,
Of these supposed-evils, to give me leave,
By circumstance, but to acquit myself.

LADY ANNE:
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,
For these known evils, but to give me leave,
By circumstance, to curse thy cursed self.

GLOUCESTER:
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have
Some patient leisure to excuse myself.

LADY ANNE:
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
No excuse current, but to hang thyself.

GLOUCESTER:
By such despair, I should accuse myself.

LADY ANNE:
And, by despairing, shouldst thou stand excused;
For doing worthy vengeance on thyself,
Which didst unworthy slaughter upon others.

GLOUCESTER:
Say that I slew them not?

LADY ANNE:
Why, then they are not dead:
But dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.

GLOUCESTER:
I did not kill your husband.

LADY ANNE:
Why, then he is alive.

GLOUCESTER:
Nay, he is dead; and slain by Edward's hand.

LADY ANNE:
In thy foul throat thou liest: Queen Margaret saw
Thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood;
The which thou once didst bend against her breast,
But that thy brothers beat aside the point.

GLOUCESTER:
I was provoked by her slanderous tongue,
which laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.

LADY ANNE:
Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind.
Which never dreamt on aught but butcheries:
Didst thou not kill this king?

GLOUCESTER:
I grant ye.

LADY ANNE:
Dost grant me, hedgehog? then, God grant me too
Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed!
O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous!

GLOUCESTER:
The fitter for the King of heaven, that hath him.

LADY ANNE:
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.

GLOUCESTER:
Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither;
For he was fitter for that place than earth.

LADY ANNE:
And thou unfit for any place but hell.

GLOUCESTER:
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.

LADY ANNE:
Some dungeon.

GLOUCESTER:
Your bed-chamber.

LADY ANNE:
I'll rest betide the chamber where thou liest!

GLOUCESTER:
So will it, madam till I lie with you.

LADY ANNE:
I hope so.

GLOUCESTER:
I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,
To leave this keen encounter of our wits,
And fall somewhat into a slower method,
Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
As blameful as the executioner?

LADY ANNE:
Thou art the cause, and most accursed effect.

GLOUCESTER:
Your beauty was the cause of that effect;
Your beauty: which did haunt me in my sleep
To undertake the death of all the world,
So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.

LADY ANNE:
If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.

GLOUCESTER:
These eyes could never endure sweet beauty's wreck;
You should not blemish it, if I stood by:
As all the world is cheered by the sun,
So I by that; it is my day, my life.

LADY ANNE:
Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life!

GLOUCESTER:
Curse not thyself, fair creature thou art both.

LADY ANNE:
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.

GLOUCESTER:
It is a quarrel most unnatural,
To be revenged on him that loveth you.

LADY ANNE:
It is a quarrel just and reasonable,
To be revenged on him that slew my husband.

GLOUCESTER:
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband,
Did it to help thee to a better husband.

LADY ANNE:
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.

GLOUCESTER:
He lives that loves thee better than he could.

LADY ANNE:
Name him.

GLOUCESTER:
Plantagenet.

LADY ANNE:
Why, that was he.

GLOUCESTER:
The selfsame name, but one of better nature.

LADY ANNE:
Where is he?

GLOUCESTER:
Here.
Why dost thou spit at me?

LADY ANNE:
Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake!

GLOUCESTER:
Never came poison from so sweet a place.

LADY ANNE:
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.
Out of my sight! thou dost infect my eyes.

GLOUCESTER:
Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.

LADY ANNE:
Would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead!

GLOUCESTER:
I would they were, that I might die at once;
For now they kill me with a living death.
Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,
Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops:
These eyes that never shed remorseful tear,
No, when my father York and Edward wept,
To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made
When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;
Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,
Told the sad story of my father's death,
And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,
That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks
Like trees bedash'd with rain: in that sad time
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale,
Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.
I never sued to friend nor enemy;
My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word;
But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,
My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
Teach not thy lips such scorn, for they were made
For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.
If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword;
Which if thou please to hide in this true bosom.
And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,
I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,
And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry,
But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me.
Nay, now dispatch; 'twas I that stabb'd young Edward,
But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
Take up the sword again, or take up me.

LADY ANNE:
Arise, dissembler: though I wish thy death,
I will not be the executioner.

GLOUCESTER:
Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.

LADY ANNE:
I have already.

GLOUCESTER:
Tush, that was in thy rage:
Speak it again, and, even with the word,
That hand, which, for thy love, did kill thy love,
Shall, for thy love, kill a far truer love;
To both their deaths thou shalt be accessary.

LADY ANNE:
I would I knew thy heart.

GLOUCESTER:
'Tis figured in my tongue.

LADY ANNE:
I fear me both are false.

GLOUCESTER:
Then never man was true.

LADY ANNE:
Well, well, put up your sword.

GLOUCESTER:
Say, then, my peace is made.

LADY ANNE:
That shall you know hereafter.

GLOUCESTER:
But shall I live in hope?

LADY ANNE:
All men, I hope, live so.

GLOUCESTER:
Vouchsafe to wear this ring.

LADY ANNE:
To take is not to give.

GLOUCESTER:
Look, how this ring encompasseth finger.
Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart;
Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
And if thy poor devoted suppliant may
But beg one favour at thy gracious hand,
Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.

LADY ANNE:
What is it?

GLOUCESTER:
That it would please thee leave these sad designs
To him that hath more cause to be a mourner,
And presently repair to Crosby Place;
Where, after I have solemnly interr'd
At Chertsey monastery this noble king,
And wet his grave with my repentant tears,
I will with all expedient duty see you:
For divers unknown reasons. I beseech you,
Grant me this boon.

LADY ANNE:
With all my heart; and much it joys me too,
To see you are become so penitent.
Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.

GLOUCESTER:
Bid me farewell.

LADY ANNE:
'Tis more than you deserve;
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I have said farewell already.

GLOUCESTER:
Sirs, take up the corse.

GENTLEMEN:
Towards Chertsey, noble lord?

GLOUCESTER:
No, to White-Friars; there attend my coining.
Was ever woman in this humour woo'd?
Was ever woman in this humour won?
I'll have her; but I will not keep her long.
What! I, that kill'd her husband and his father,
To take her in her heart's extremest hate,
With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
The bleeding witness of her hatred by;
Having God, her conscience, and these bars
against me,
And I nothing to back my suit at all,
But the plain devil and dissembling looks,
And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!
Ha!
Hath she forgot already that brave prince,
Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since,
Stabb'd in my angry mood at Tewksbury?
A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,
Framed in the prodigality of nature,
Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,
The spacious world cannot again afford
And will she yet debase her eyes on me,
That cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince,
And made her widow to a woful bed?
On me, whose all not equals Edward's moiety?
On me, that halt and am unshapen thus?
My dukedom to a beggarly denier,
I do mistake my person all this while:
Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,
Myself to be a marvellous proper man.
I'll be at charges for a looking-glass,
And entertain some score or two of tailors,
To study fashions to adorn my body:
Since I am crept in favour with myself,
Will maintain it with some little cost.
But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave;
And then return lamenting to my love.
Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,
That I may see my shadow as I pass.

RIVERS:
Have patience, madam: there's no doubt his majesty
Will soon recover his accustom'd health.

GREY:
In that you brook it in, it makes him worse:
Therefore, for God's sake, entertain good comfort,
And cheer his grace with quick and merry words.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
If he were dead, what would betide of me?

RIVERS:
No other harm but loss of such a lord.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The loss of such a lord includes all harm.

GREY:
The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son,
To be your comforter when he is gone.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Oh, he is young and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,
A man that loves not me, nor none of you.

RIVERS:
Is it concluded that he shall be protector?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
It is determined, not concluded yet:
But so it must be, if the king miscarry.

GREY:
Here come the lords of Buckingham and Derby.

BUCKINGHAM:
Good time of day unto your royal grace!

DERBY:
God make your majesty joyful as you have been!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The Countess Richmond, good my Lord of Derby.
To your good prayers will scarcely say amen.
Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife,
And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.

DERBY:
I do beseech you, either not believe
The envious slanders of her false accusers;
Or, if she be accused in true report,
Bear with her weakness, which, I think proceeds
From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.

RIVERS:
Saw you the king to-day, my Lord of Derby?

DERBY:
But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
Are come from visiting his majesty.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What likelihood of his amendment, lords?

BUCKINGHAM:
Madam, good hope; his grace speaks cheerfully.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
God grant him health! Did you confer with him?

BUCKINGHAM:
Madam, we did: he desires to make atonement
Betwixt the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,
And betwixt them and my lord chamberlain;
And sent to warn them to his royal presence.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Would all were well! but that will never be
I fear our happiness is at the highest.

GLOUCESTER:
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it:
Who are they that complain unto the king,
That I, forsooth, am stern, and love them not?
By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly
That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours.
Because I cannot flatter and speak fair,
Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog,
Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,
I must be held a rancorous enemy.
Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,
But thus his simple truth must be abused
By silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?

RIVERS:
To whom in all this presence speaks your grace?

GLOUCESTER:
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.
When have I injured thee? when done thee wrong?
Or thee? or thee? or any of your faction?
A plague upon you all! His royal person,--
Whom God preserve better than you would wish!--
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing-while,
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.
The king, of his own royal disposition,
And not provoked by any suitor else;
Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred,
Which in your outward actions shows itself
Against my kindred, brothers, and myself,
Makes him to send; that thereby he may gather
The ground of your ill-will, and so remove it.

GLOUCESTER:
I cannot tell: the world is grown so bad,
That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch:
Since every Jack became a gentleman
There's many a gentle person made a Jack.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother
Gloucester;
You envy my advancement and my friends':
God grant we never may have need of you!

GLOUCESTER:
Meantime, God grants that we have need of you:
Your brother is imprison'd by your means,
Myself disgraced, and the nobility
Held in contempt; whilst many fair promotions
Are daily given to ennoble those
That scarce, some two days since, were worth a noble.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
By Him that raised me to this careful height
From that contented hap which I enjoy'd,
I never did incense his majesty
Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My lord, you do me shameful injury,
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.

GLOUCESTER:
You may deny that you were not the cause
Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.

RIVERS:
She may, my lord, for--

GLOUCESTER:
She may, Lord Rivers! why, who knows not so?
She may do more, sir, than denying that:
She may help you to many fair preferments,
And then deny her aiding hand therein,
And lay those honours on your high deserts.
What may she not? She may, yea, marry, may she--

RIVERS:
What, marry, may she?

GLOUCESTER:
What, marry, may she! marry with a king,
A bachelor, a handsome stripling too:
I wis your grandam had a worser match.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne
Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs:
By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty
With those gross taunts I often have endured.
I had rather be a country servant-maid
Than a great queen, with this condition,
To be thus taunted, scorn'd, and baited at:
Small joy have I in being England's queen.

QUEEN MARGARET:
And lessen'd be that small, God, I beseech thee!
Thy honour, state and seat is due to me.

GLOUCESTER:
What! threat you me with telling of the king?
Tell him, and spare not: look, what I have said
I will avouch in presence of the king:
I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower.
'Tis time to speak; my pains are quite forgot.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Out, devil! I remember them too well:
Thou slewest my husband Henry in the Tower,
And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury.

GLOUCESTER:
Ere you were queen, yea, or your husband king,
I was a pack-horse in his great affairs;
A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,
A liberal rewarder of his friends:
To royalize his blood I spilt mine own.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Yea, and much better blood than his or thine.

GLOUCESTER:
In all which time you and your husband Grey
Were factious for the house of Lancaster;
And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband
In Margaret's battle at Saint Alban's slain?
Let me put in your minds, if you forget,
What you have been ere now, and what you are;
Withal, what I have been, and what I am.

QUEEN MARGARET:
A murderous villain, and so still thou art.

GLOUCESTER:
Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick;
Yea, and forswore himself,--which Jesu pardon!--

QUEEN MARGARET:
Which God revenge!

GLOUCESTER:
To fight on Edward's party for the crown;
And for his meed, poor lord, he is mew'd up.
I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward's;
Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine
I am too childish-foolish for this world.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world,
Thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is.

RIVERS:
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
We follow'd then our lord, our lawful king:
So should we you, if you should be our king.

GLOUCESTER:
If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar:
Far be it from my heart, the thought of it!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
As little joy, my lord, as you suppose
You should enjoy, were you this country's king,
As little joy may you suppose in me.
That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.

QUEEN MARGARET:
A little joy enjoys the queen thereof;
For I am she, and altogether joyless.
I can no longer hold me patient.
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out
In sharing that which you have pill'd from me!
Which of you trembles not that looks on me?
If not, that, I being queen, you bow like subjects,
Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels?
O gentle villain, do not turn away!

GLOUCESTER:
Foul wrinkled witch, what makest thou in my sight?

QUEEN MARGARET:
But repetition of what thou hast marr'd;
That will I make before I let thee go.

GLOUCESTER:
Wert thou not banished on pain of death?

QUEEN MARGARET:
I was; but I do find more pain in banishment
Than death can yield me here by my abode.
A husband and a son thou owest to me;
And thou a kingdom; all of you allegiance:
The sorrow that I have, by right is yours,
And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.

GLOUCESTER:
The curse my noble father laid on thee,
When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper
And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes,
And then, to dry them, gavest the duke a clout
Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland--
His curses, then from bitterness of soul
Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee;
And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
So just is God, to right the innocent.

HASTINGS:
O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!

RIVERS:
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.

DORSET:
No man but prophesied revenge for it.

BUCKINGHAM:
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.

QUEEN MARGARET:
What were you snarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven?
That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death,
Their kingdom's loss, my woful banishment,
Could all but answer for that peevish brat?
Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
Why, then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
If not by war, by surfeit die your king,
As ours by murder, to make him a king!
Edward thy son, which now is Prince of Wales,
For Edward my son, which was Prince of Wales,
Die in his youth by like untimely violence!
Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self!
Long mayst thou live to wail thy children's loss;
And see another, as I see thee now,
Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine!
Long die thy happy days before thy death;
And, after many lengthen'd hours of grief,
Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen!
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by,
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
Was stabb'd with bloody daggers: God, I pray him,
That none of you may live your natural age,
But by some unlook'd accident cut off!

GLOUCESTER:
Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd hag!

QUEEN MARGARET:
And leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.
If heaven have any grievous plague in store
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace!
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul!
Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest,
And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!
No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,
Unless it be whilst some tormenting dream
Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
Thou elvish-mark'd, abortive, rooting hog!
Thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity
The slave of nature and the son of hell!
Thou slander of thy mother's heavy womb!
Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins!
Thou rag of honour! thou detested--

GLOUCESTER:
Margaret.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Richard!

GLOUCESTER:
Ha!

QUEEN MARGARET:
I call thee not.

GLOUCESTER:
I cry thee mercy then, for I had thought
That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Why, so I did; but look'd for no reply.
O, let me make the period to my curse!

GLOUCESTER:
'Tis done by me, and ends in 'Margaret.'

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune!
Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider,
Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
Fool, fool! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself.
The time will come when thou shalt wish for me
To help thee curse that poisonous bunchback'd toad.

HASTINGS:
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Foul shame upon you! you have all moved mine.

RIVERS:
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.

QUEEN MARGARET:
To serve me well, you all should do me duty,
Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects:
O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!

DORSET:
Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Peace, master marquess, you are malapert:
Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.
O, that your young nobility could judge
What 'twere to lose it, and be miserable!
They that stand high have many blasts to shake them;
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.

GLOUCESTER:
Good counsel, marry: learn it, learn it, marquess.

DORSET:
It toucheth you, my lord, as much as me.

GLOUCESTER:
Yea, and much more: but I was born so high,
Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top,
And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.

QUEEN MARGARET:
And turns the sun to shade; alas! alas!
Witness my son, now in the shade of death;
Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkness folded up.
Your aery buildeth in our aery's nest.
O God, that seest it, do not suffer it!
As it was won with blood, lost be it so!

BUCKINGHAM:
Have done! for shame, if not for charity.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Urge neither charity nor shame to me:
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And shamefully by you my hopes are butcher'd.
My charity is outrage, life my shame
And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage.

BUCKINGHAM:
Have done, have done.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O princely Buckingham I'll kiss thy hand,
In sign of league and amity with thee:
Now fair befal thee and thy noble house!
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.

BUCKINGHAM:
Nor no one here; for curses never pass
The lips of those that breathe them in the air.

QUEEN MARGARET:
I'll not believe but they ascend the sky,
And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!
Look, when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death:
Have not to do with him, beware of him;
Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
And all their ministers attend on him.

GLOUCESTER:
What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?

BUCKINGHAM:
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.

QUEEN MARGARET:
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel?
And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?
O, but remember this another day,
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
And say poor Margaret was a prophetess!
Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to God's!

HASTINGS:
My hair doth stand on end to hear her curses.

RIVERS:
And so doth mine: I muse why she's at liberty.

GLOUCESTER:
I cannot blame her: by God's holy mother,
She hath had too much wrong; and I repent
My part thereof that I have done to her.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I never did her any, to my knowledge.

GLOUCESTER:
But you have all the vantage of her wrong.
I was too hot to do somebody good,
That is too cold in thinking of it now.
Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid,
He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains
God pardon them that are the cause of it!

RIVERS:
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.

GLOUCESTER:
So do I ever:
being well-advised.
For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.

CATESBY:
Madam, his majesty doth call for you,
And for your grace; and you, my noble lords.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Catesby, we come. Lords, will you go with us?

RIVERS:
Madam, we will attend your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
The secret mischiefs that I set abroach
I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
Clarence, whom I, indeed, have laid in darkness,
I do beweep to many simple gulls
Namely, to Hastings, Derby, Buckingham;
And say it is the queen and her allies
That stir the king against the duke my brother.
Now, they believe it; and withal whet me
To be revenged on Rivers, Vaughan, Grey:
But then I sigh; and, with a piece of scripture,
Tell them that God bids us do good for evil:
And thus I clothe my naked villany
With old odd ends stolen out of holy writ;
And seem a saint, when most I play the devil.
But, soft! here come my executioners.
How now, my hardy, stout resolved mates!
Are you now going to dispatch this deed?

First Murderer:
We are, my lord; and come to have the warrant
That we may be admitted where he is.

GLOUCESTER:
Well thought upon; I have it here about me.
When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.
But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,
Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;
For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps
May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.

First Murderer:
Tush!
Fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate;
Talkers are no good doers: be assured
We come to use our hands and not our tongues.

GLOUCESTER:
Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears:
I like you, lads; about your business straight;
Go, go, dispatch.

First Murderer:
We will, my noble lord.

BRAKENBURY:
Why looks your grace so heavily today?

CLARENCE:
O, I have pass'd a miserable night,
So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams,
That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night,
Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days,
So full of dismal terror was the time!

BRAKENBURY:
What was your dream? I long to hear you tell it.

CLARENCE:
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower,
And was embark'd to cross to Burgundy;
And, in my company, my brother Gloucester;
Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
Upon the hatches: thence we looked toward England,
And cited up a thousand fearful times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster
That had befall'n us. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloucester stumbled; and, in falling,
Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard,
Into the tumbling billows of the main.
Lord, Lord! methought, what pain it was to drown!
What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears!
What ugly sights of death within mine eyes!
Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks;
Ten thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon;
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
All scatter'd in the bottom of the sea:
Some lay in dead men's skulls; and, in those holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
As 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems,
Which woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep,
And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by.

BRAKENBURY:
Had you such leisure in the time of death
To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?

CLARENCE:
Methought I had; and often did I strive
To yield the ghost: but still the envious flood
Kept in my soul, and would not let it forth
To seek the empty, vast and wandering air;
But smother'd it within my panting bulk,
Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.

BRAKENBURY:
Awaked you not with this sore agony?

CLARENCE:
O, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life;
O, then began the tempest to my soul,
Who pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood,
With that grim ferryman which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger soul,
Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick;
Who cried aloud, 'What scourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?'
And so he vanish'd: then came wandering by
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood; and he squeak'd out aloud,
'Clarence is come; false, fleeting, perjured Clarence,
That stabb'd me in the field by Tewksbury;
Seize on him, Furies, take him to your torments!'
With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
Environ'd me about, and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries, that with the very noise
I trembling waked, and for a season after
Could not believe but that I was in hell,
Such terrible impression made the dream.

BRAKENBURY:
No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you;
I promise, I am afraid to hear you tell it.

CLARENCE:
O Brakenbury, I have done those things,
Which now bear evidence against my soul,
For Edward's sake; and see how he requites me!
O God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone,
O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me;
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.

BRAKENBURY:
I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest!
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
Makes the night morning, and the noon-tide night.
Princes have but their tides for their glories,
An outward honour for an inward toil;
And, for unfelt imagination,
They often feel a world of restless cares:
So that, betwixt their tides and low names,
There's nothing differs but the outward fame.

First Murderer:
Ho! who's here?

BRAKENBURY:
In God's name what are you, and how came you hither?

First Murderer:
I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.

BRAKENBURY:
Yea, are you so brief?

Second Murderer:
O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious. Show
him our commission; talk no more.

BRAKENBURY:
I am, in this, commanded to deliver
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands:
I will not reason what is meant hereby,
Because I will be guiltless of the meaning.
Here are the keys, there sits the duke asleep:
I'll to the king; and signify to him
That thus I have resign'd my charge to you.

First Murderer:
Do so, it is a point of wisdom: fare you well.

Second Murderer:
What, shall we stab him as he sleeps?

First Murderer:
No; then he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.

Second Murderer:
When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till
the judgment-day.

First Murderer:
Why, then he will say we stabbed him sleeping.

Second Murderer:
The urging of that word 'judgment' hath bred a kind
of remorse in me.

First Murderer:
What, art thou afraid?

Second Murderer:
Not to kill him, having a warrant for it; but to be
damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.

First Murderer:
I thought thou hadst been resolute.

Second Murderer:
So I am, to let him live.

First Murderer:
Back to the Duke of Gloucester, tell him so.

Second Murderer:
I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour
will change; 'twas wont to hold me but while one
would tell twenty.

First Murderer:
How dost thou feel thyself now?

Second Murderer:
'Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet
within me.

First Murderer:
Remember our reward, when the deed is done.

Second Murderer:
'Zounds, he dies: I had forgot the reward.

First Murderer:
Where is thy conscience now?

Second Murderer:
In the Duke of Gloucester's purse.

First Murderer:
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward,
thy conscience flies out.

Second Murderer:
Let it go; there's few or none will entertain it.

First Murderer:
How if it come to thee again?

Second Murderer:
I'll not meddle with it: it is a dangerous thing: it
makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal, but it
accuseth him; he cannot swear, but it cheques him;
he cannot lie with his neighbour's wife, but it
detects him: 'tis a blushing shamefast spirit that
mutinies in a man's bosom; it fills one full of
obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold
that I found; it beggars any man that keeps it: it
is turned out of all towns and cities for a
dangerous thing; and every man that means to live
well endeavours to trust to himself and to live
without it.

First Murderer:
'Zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me
not to kill the duke.

Second Murderer:
Take the devil in thy mind, and relieve him not: he
would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.

First Murderer:
Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me,
I warrant thee.

Second Murderer:
Spoke like a tail fellow that respects his
reputation. Come, shall we to this gear?

First Murderer:
Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy
sword, and then we will chop him in the malmsey-butt
in the next room.

Second Murderer:
O excellent devise! make a sop of him.

First Murderer:
Hark! he stirs: shall I strike?

Second Murderer:
No, first let's reason with him.

CLARENCE:
Where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine.

Second murderer:
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.

CLARENCE:
In God's name, what art thou?

Second Murderer:
A man, as you are.

CLARENCE:
But not, as I am, royal.

Second Murderer:
Nor you, as we are, loyal.

CLARENCE:
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.

Second Murderer:
My voice is now the king's, my looks mine own.

CLARENCE:
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!
Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale?
Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?

Both:
To, to, to--

CLARENCE:
To murder me?

Both:
Ay, ay.

CLARENCE:
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?

First Murderer:
Offended us you have not, but the king.

CLARENCE:
I shall be reconciled to him again.

Second Murderer:
Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.

CLARENCE:
Are you call'd forth from out a world of men
To slay the innocent? What is my offence?
Where are the evidence that do accuse me?
What lawful quest have given their verdict up
Unto the frowning judge? or who pronounced
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death?
Before I be convict by course of law,
To threaten me with death is most unlawful.
I charge you, as you hope to have redemption
By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
That you depart and lay no hands on me
The deed you undertake is damnable.

First Murderer:
What we will do, we do upon command.

Second Murderer:
And he that hath commanded is the king.

CLARENCE:
Erroneous vassal! the great King of kings
Hath in the tables of his law commanded
That thou shalt do no murder: and wilt thou, then,
Spurn at his edict and fulfil a man's?
Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hands,
To hurl upon their heads that break his law.

Second Murderer:
And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee,
For false forswearing and for murder too:
Thou didst receive the holy sacrament,
To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.

First Murderer:
And, like a traitor to the name of God,
Didst break that vow; and with thy treacherous blade
Unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.

Second Murderer:
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.

First Murderer:
How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us,
When thou hast broke it in so dear degree?

CLARENCE:
Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?
For Edward, for my brother, for his sake: Why, sirs,
He sends ye not to murder me for this
For in this sin he is as deep as I.
If God will be revenged for this deed.
O, know you yet, he doth it publicly,
Take not the quarrel from his powerful arm;
He needs no indirect nor lawless course
To cut off those that have offended him.

First Murderer:
Who made thee, then, a bloody minister,
When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet,
That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?

CLARENCE:
My brother's love, the devil, and my rage.

First Murderer:
Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy fault,
Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.

CLARENCE:
Oh, if you love my brother, hate not me;
I am his brother, and I love him well.
If you be hired for meed, go back again,
And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
Who shall reward you better for my life
Than Edward will for tidings of my death.

Second Murderer:
You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.

CLARENCE:
O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear:
Go you to him from me.

Both:
Ay, so we will.

CLARENCE:
Tell him, when that our princely father York
Bless'd his three sons with his victorious arm,
And charged us from his soul to love each other,
He little thought of this divided friendship:
Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.

First Murderer:
Ay, millstones; as be lesson'd us to weep.

CLARENCE:
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.

First Murderer:
Right,
As snow in harvest. Thou deceivest thyself:
'Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.

CLARENCE:
It cannot be; for when I parted with him,
He hugg'd me in his arms, and swore, with sobs,
That he would labour my delivery.

Second Murderer:
Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee
From this world's thraldom to the joys of heaven.

First Murderer:
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.

CLARENCE:
Hast thou that holy feeling in thy soul,
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
And art thou yet to thy own soul so blind,
That thou wilt war with God by murdering me?
Ah, sirs, consider, he that set you on
To do this deed will hate you for the deed.

Second Murderer:
What shall we do?

CLARENCE:
Relent, and save your souls.

First Murderer:
Relent! 'tis cowardly and womanish.

CLARENCE:
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.
Which of you, if you were a prince's son,
Being pent from liberty, as I am now,
if two such murderers as yourselves came to you,
Would not entreat for life?
My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks:
O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,
Come thou on my side, and entreat for me,
As you would beg, were you in my distress
A begging prince what beggar pities not?

Second Murderer:
Look behind you, my lord.

First Murderer:
Take that, and that: if all this will not do,
I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.

Second Murderer:
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatch'd!
How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
Of this most grievous guilty murder done!

First Murderer:
How now! what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not?
By heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art!

Second Murderer:
I would he knew that I had saved his brother!
Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say;
For I repent me that the duke is slain.

First Murderer:
So do not I: go, coward as thou art.
Now must I hide his body in some hole,
Until the duke take order for his burial:
And when I have my meed, I must away;
For this will out, and here I must not stay.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, so: now have I done a good day's work:
You peers, continue this united league:
I every day expect an embassage
From my Redeemer to redeem me hence;
And now in peace my soul shall part to heaven,
Since I have set my friends at peace on earth.
Rivers and Hastings, take each other's hand;
Dissemble not your hatred, swear your love.

RIVERS:
By heaven, my heart is purged from grudging hate:
And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.

HASTINGS:
So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!

KING EDWARD IV:
Take heed you dally not before your king;
Lest he that is the supreme King of kings
Confound your hidden falsehood, and award
Either of you to be the other's end.

HASTINGS:
So prosper I, as I swear perfect love!

RIVERS:
And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!

KING EDWARD IV:
Madam, yourself are not exempt in this,
Nor your son Dorset, Buckingham, nor you;
You have been factious one against the other,
Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand;
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Here, Hastings; I will never more remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine!

KING EDWARD IV:
Dorset, embrace him; Hastings, love lord marquess.

DORSET:
This interchange of love, I here protest,
Upon my part shall be unviolable.

HASTINGS:
And so swear I, my lord

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league
With thy embracements to my wife's allies,
And make me happy in your unity.

BUCKINGHAM:
Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate
On you or yours,
but with all duteous love
Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me
With hate in those where I expect most love!
When I have most need to employ a friend,
And most assured that he is a friend
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
Be he unto me! this do I beg of God,
When I am cold in zeal to yours.

KING EDWARD IV:
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,
is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here,
To make the perfect period of this peace.

BUCKINGHAM:
And, in good time, here comes the noble duke.

GLOUCESTER:
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen:
And, princely peers, a happy time of day!

KING EDWARD IV:
Happy, indeed, as we have spent the day.
Brother, we done deeds of charity;
Made peace enmity, fair love of hate,
Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.

GLOUCESTER:
A blessed labour, my most sovereign liege:
Amongst this princely heap, if any here,
By false intelligence, or wrong surmise,
Hold me a foe;
If I unwittingly, or in my rage,
Have aught committed that is hardly borne
By any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his friendly peace:
'Tis death to me to be at enmity;
I hate it, and desire all good men's love.
First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my duteous service;
Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were lodged between us;
Of you, Lord Rivers, and, Lord Grey, of you;
That without desert have frown'd on me;
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all.
I do not know that Englishman alive
With whom my soul is any jot at odds
More than the infant that is born to-night
I thank my God for my humility.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter:
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
My sovereign liege, I do beseech your majesty
To take our brother Clarence to your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, madam, have I offer'd love for this
To be so bouted in this royal presence?
Who knows not that the noble duke is dead?
You do him injury to scorn his corse.

RIVERS:
Who knows not he is dead! who knows he is?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
All seeing heaven, what a world is this!

BUCKINGHAM:
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?

DORSET:
Ay, my good lord; and no one in this presence
But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.

KING EDWARD IV:
Is Clarence dead? the order was reversed.

GLOUCESTER:
But he, poor soul, by your first order died,
And that a winged Mercury did bear:
Some tardy cripple bore the countermand,
That came too lag to see him buried.
God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, but not in blood,
Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,
And yet go current from suspicion!

DORSET:
A boon, my sovereign, for my service done!

KING EDWARD IV:
I pray thee, peace: my soul is full of sorrow.

DORSET:
I will not rise, unless your highness grant.

KING EDWARD IV:
Then speak at once what is it thou demand'st.

DORSET:
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life;
Who slew to-day a righteous gentleman
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.

KING EDWARD IV:
Have a tongue to doom my brother's death,
And shall the same give pardon to a slave?
My brother slew no man; his fault was thought,
And yet his punishment was cruel death.
Who sued to me for him? who, in my rage,
Kneel'd at my feet, and bade me be advised
Who spake of brotherhood? who spake of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me?
Who told me, in the field by Tewksbury
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,
And said, 'Dear brother, live, and be a king'?
Who told me, when we both lay in the field
Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me
Even in his own garments, and gave himself,
All thin and naked, to the numb cold night?
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath
Sinfully pluck'd, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your carters or your waiting-vassals
Have done a drunken slaughter, and defaced
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon;
And I unjustly too, must grant it you
But for my brother not a man would speak,
Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself
For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all
Have been beholding to him in his life;
Yet none of you would once plead for his life.
O God, I fear thy justice will take hold
On me, and you, and mine, and yours for this!
Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.
Oh, poor Clarence!

GLOUCESTER:
This is the fruit of rashness! Mark'd you not
How that the guilty kindred of the queen
Look'd pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?
O, they did urge it still unto the king!
God will revenge it. But come, let us in,
To comfort Edward with our company.

BUCKINGHAM:
We wait upon your grace.

Boy:
Tell me, good grandam, is our father dead?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
No, boy.

Boy:
Why do you wring your hands, and beat your breast,
And cry 'O Clarence, my unhappy son!'

Girl:
Why do you look on us, and shake your head,
And call us wretches, orphans, castaways
If that our noble father be alive?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
My pretty cousins, you mistake me much;
I do lament the sickness of the king.
As loath to lose him, not your father's death;
It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.

Boy:
Then, grandam, you conclude that he is dead.
The king my uncle is to blame for this:
God will revenge it; whom I will importune
With daily prayers all to that effect.

Girl:
And so will I.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Peace, children, peace! the king doth love you well:
Incapable and shallow innocents,
You cannot guess who caused your father's death.

Boy:
Grandam, we can; for my good uncle Gloucester
Told me, the king, provoked by the queen,
Devised impeachments to imprison him :
And when my uncle told me so, he wept,
And hugg'd me in his arm, and kindly kiss'd my cheek;
Bade me rely on him as on my father,
And he would love me dearly as his child.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Oh, that deceit should steal such gentle shapes,
And with a virtuous vizard hide foul guile!
He is my son; yea, and therein my shame;
Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.

Boy:
Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Ay, boy.

Boy:
I cannot think it. Hark! what noise is this?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Oh, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,
To chide my fortune, and torment myself?
I'll join with black despair against my soul,
And to myself become an enemy.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What means this scene of rude impatience?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
To make an act of tragic violence:
Edward, my lord, your son, our king, is dead.
Why grow the branches now the root is wither'd?
Why wither not the leaves the sap being gone?
If you will live, lament; if die, be brief,
That our swift-winged souls may catch the king's;
Or, like obedient subjects, follow him
To his new kingdom of perpetual rest.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow
As I had title in thy noble husband!
I have bewept a worthy husband's death,
And lived by looking on his images:
But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
Are crack'd in pieces by malignant death,
And I for comfort have but one false glass,
Which grieves me when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a widow; yet thou art a mother,
And hast the comfort of thy children left thee:
But death hath snatch'd my husband from mine arms,
And pluck'd two crutches from my feeble limbs,
Edward and Clarence. O, what cause have I,
Thine being but a moiety of my grief,
To overgo thy plaints and drown thy cries!

Boy:
Good aunt, you wept not for our father's death;
How can we aid you with our kindred tears?

Girl:
Our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd;
Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Give me no help in lamentation;
I am not barren to bring forth complaints
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I, being govern'd by the watery moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world!
Oh for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!

Children:
Oh for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What stay had I but Edward? and he's gone.

Children:
What stay had we but Clarence? and he's gone.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What stays had I but they? and they are gone.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Was never widow had so dear a loss!

Children:
Were never orphans had so dear a loss!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Was never mother had so dear a loss!
Alas, I am the mother of these moans!
Their woes are parcell'd, mine are general.
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I;
I for a Clarence weep, so doth not she:
These babes for Clarence weep and so do I;
I for an Edward weep, so do not they:
Alas, you three, on me, threefold distress'd,
Pour all your tears! I am your sorrow's nurse,
And I will pamper it with lamentations.

DORSET:
Comfort, dear mother: God is much displeased
That you take with unthankfulness, his doing:
In common worldly things, 'tis call'd ungrateful,
With dull unwilligness to repay a debt
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
For it requires the royal debt it lent you.

RIVERS:
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
Of the young prince your son: send straight for him
Let him be crown'd; in him your comfort lives:
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave,
And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.

GLOUCESTER:
Madam, have comfort: all of us have cause
To wail the dimming of our shining star;
But none can cure their harms by wailing them.
Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy;
I did not see your grace: humbly on my knee
I crave your blessing.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
God bless thee; and put meekness in thy mind,
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty!

GLOUCESTER:

BUCKINGHAM:
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers,
That bear this mutual heavy load of moan,
Now cheer each other in each other's love
Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
We are to reap the harvest of his son.
The broken rancour of your high-swoln hearts,
But lately splinter'd, knit, and join'd together,
Must gently be preserved, cherish'd, and kept:
Me seemeth good, that, with some little train,
Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fetch'd
Hither to London, to be crown'd our king.

RIVERS:
Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?

BUCKINGHAM:
Marry, my lord, lest, by a multitude,
The new-heal'd wound of malice should break out,
Which would be so much the more dangerous
By how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd:
Where every horse bears his commanding rein,
And may direct his course as please himself,
As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent,
In my opinion, ought to be prevented.

GLOUCESTER:
I hope the king made peace with all of us
And the compact is firm and true in me.

RIVERS:
And so in me; and so, I think, in all:
Yet, since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be urged:
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham,
That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.

HASTINGS:
And so say I.

GLOUCESTER:
Then be it so; and go we to determine
Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.
Madam, and you, my mother, will you go
To give your censures in this weighty business?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
With all our harts.

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
For God's sake, let not us two be behind;
For, by the way, I'll sort occasion,
As index to the story we late talk'd of,
To part the queen's proud kindred from the king.

GLOUCESTER:
My other self, my counsel's consistory,
My oracle, my prophet! My dear cousin,
I, like a child, will go by thy direction.
Towards Ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.

First Citizen:
Neighbour, well met: whither away so fast?

Second Citizen:
I promise you, I scarcely know myself:
Hear you the news abroad?

First Citizen:
Ay, that the king is dead.

Second Citizen:
Bad news, by'r lady; seldom comes the better:
I fear, I fear 'twill prove a troublous world.

Third Citizen:
Neighbours, God speed!

First Citizen:
Give you good morrow, sir.

Third Citizen:
Doth this news hold of good King Edward's death?

Second Citizen:
Ay, sir, it is too true; God help the while!

Third Citizen:
Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.

First Citizen:
No, no; by God's good grace his son shall reign.

Third Citizen:
Woe to the land that's govern'd by a child!

Second Citizen:
In him there is a hope of government,
That in his nonage council under him,
And in his full and ripen'd years himself,
No doubt, shall then and till then govern well.

First Citizen:
So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
Was crown'd in Paris but at nine months old.

Third Citizen:
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot;
For then this land was famously enrich'd
With politic grave counsel; then the king
Had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.

First Citizen:
Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.

Third Citizen:
Better it were they all came by the father,
Or by the father there were none at all;
For emulation now, who shall be nearest,
Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.
O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester!
And the queen's sons and brothers haught and proud:
And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,
This sickly land might solace as before.

First Citizen:
Come, come, we fear the worst; all shall be well.

Third Citizen:
When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks;
When great leaves fall, the winter is at hand;
When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.
All may be well; but, if God sort it so,
'Tis more than we deserve, or I expect.

Second Citizen:
Truly, the souls of men are full of dread:
Ye cannot reason almost with a man
That looks not heavily and full of fear.

Third Citizen:
Before the times of change, still is it so:
By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust
Ensuing dangers; as by proof, we see
The waters swell before a boisterous storm.
But leave it all to God. whither away?

Second Citizen:
Marry, we were sent for to the justices.

Third Citizen:
And so was I: I'll bear you company.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Last night, I hear, they lay at Northampton;
At Stony-Stratford will they be to-night:
To-morrow, or next day, they will be here.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I long with all my heart to see the prince:
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But I hear, no; they say my son of York
Hath almost overta'en him in his growth.

YORK:
Ay, mother; but I would not have it so.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why, my young cousin, it is good to grow.

YORK:
Grandam, one night, as we did sit at supper,
My uncle Rivers talk'd how I did grow
More than my brother: 'Ay,' quoth my uncle
Gloucester,
'Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow apace:'
And since, methinks, I would not grow so fast,
Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee;
He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
So long a-growing and so leisurely,
That, if this rule were true, he should be gracious.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Why, madam, so, no doubt, he is.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I hope he is; but yet let mothers doubt.

YORK:
Now, by my troth, if I had been remember'd,
I could have given my uncle's grace a flout,
To touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
How, my pretty York? I pray thee, let me hear it.

YORK:
Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old
'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I pray thee, pretty York, who told thee this?

YORK:
Grandam, his nurse.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
His nurse! why, she was dead ere thou wert born.

YORK:
If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
A parlous boy: go to, you are too shrewd.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Good madam, be not angry with the child.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Pitchers have ears.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Here comes a messenger. What news?

Messenger:
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to unfold.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
How fares the prince?

Messenger:
Well, madam, and in health.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What is thy news then?

Messenger:
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,
With them Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Who hath committed them?

Messenger:
The mighty dukes
Gloucester and Buckingham.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
For what offence?

Messenger:
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed;
Why or for what these nobles were committed
Is all unknown to me, my gracious lady.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Ay me, I see the downfall of our house!
The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind;
Insulting tyranny begins to jet
Upon the innocent and aweless throne:
Welcome, destruction, death, and massacre!
I see, as in a map, the end of all.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld!
My husband lost his life to get the crown;
And often up and down my sons were toss'd,
For me to joy and weep their gain and loss:
And being seated, and domestic broils
Clean over-blown, themselves, the conquerors.
Make war upon themselves; blood against blood,
Self against self: O, preposterous
And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen;
Or let me die, to look on death no more!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Come, come, my boy; we will to sanctuary.
Madam, farewell.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I'll go along with you.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
You have no cause.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
My gracious lady, go;
And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
For my part, I'll resign unto your grace
The seal I keep: and so betide to me
As well I tender you and all of yours!
Come, I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.

BUCKINGHAM:
Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.

GLOUCESTER:
Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign
The weary way hath made you melancholy.

PRINCE EDWARD:
No, uncle; but our crosses on the way
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy
I want more uncles here to welcome me.

GLOUCESTER:
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet dived into the world's deceit
Nor more can you distinguish of a man
Than of his outward show; which, God he knows,
Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
Those uncles which you want were dangerous;
Your grace attended to their sugar'd words,
But look'd not on the poison of their hearts :
God keep you from them, and from such false friends!

PRINCE EDWARD:
God keep me from false friends! but they were none.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.

Lord Mayor:
God bless your grace with health and happy days!

PRINCE EDWARD:
I thank you, good my lord; and thank you all.
I thought my mother, and my brother York,
Would long ere this have met us on the way
Fie, what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not
To tell us whether they will come or no!

BUCKINGHAM:
And, in good time, here comes the sweating lord.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Welcome, my lord: what, will our mother come?

HASTINGS:
On what occasion, God he knows, not I,
The queen your mother, and your brother York,
Have taken sanctuary: the tender prince
Would fain have come with me to meet your grace,
But by his mother was perforce withheld.

BUCKINGHAM:
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers! Lord cardinal, will your grace
Persuade the queen to send the Duke of York
Unto his princely brother presently?
If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,
And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.

CARDINAL:
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
We should infringe the holy privilege
Of blessed sanctuary! not for all this land
Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.

BUCKINGHAM:
You are too senseless--obstinate, my lord,
Too ceremonious and traditional
Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
You break not sanctuary in seizing him.
The benefit thereof is always granted
To those whose dealings have deserved the place,
And those who have the wit to claim the place:
This prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserved it;
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it:
Then, taking him from thence that is not there,
You break no privilege nor charter there.
Oft have I heard of sanctuary men;
But sanctuary children ne'er till now.

CARDINAL:
My lord, you shall o'er-rule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?

HASTINGS:
I go, my lord.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?

GLOUCESTER:
Where it seems best unto your royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your highness shall repose you at the Tower:
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
For your best health and recreation.

PRINCE EDWARD:
I do not like the Tower, of any place.
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?

BUCKINGHAM:
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place;
Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Is it upon record, or else reported
Successively from age to age, he built it?

BUCKINGHAM:
Upon record, my gracious lord.

PRINCE EDWARD:
But say, my lord, it were not register'd,
Methinks the truth should live from age to age,
As 'twere retail'd to all posterity,
Even to the general all-ending day.

GLOUCESTER:

PRINCE EDWARD:
What say you, uncle?

GLOUCESTER:
I say, without characters, fame lives long.
Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity,
I moralize two meanings in one word.

PRINCE EDWARD:
That Julius Caesar was a famous man;
With what his valour did enrich his wit,
His wit set down to make his valour live
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror;
For now he lives in fame, though not in life.
I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham,--

BUCKINGHAM:
What, my gracious lord?

PRINCE EDWARD:
An if I live until I be a man,
I'll win our ancient right in France again,
Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.

GLOUCESTER:

BUCKINGHAM:
Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of York.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Richard of York! how fares our loving brother?

YORK:
Well, my dread lord; so must I call you now.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours:
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
Which by his death hath lost much majesty.

GLOUCESTER:
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?

YORK:
I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth
The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.

GLOUCESTER:
He hath, my lord.

YORK:
And therefore is he idle?

GLOUCESTER:
O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.

YORK:
Then is he more beholding to you than I.

GLOUCESTER:
He may command me as my sovereign;
But you have power in me as in a kinsman.

YORK:
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.

GLOUCESTER:
My dagger, little cousin? with all my heart.

PRINCE EDWARD:
A beggar, brother?

YORK:
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give;
And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.

GLOUCESTER:
A greater gift than that I'll give my cousin.

YORK:
A greater gift! O, that's the sword to it.

GLOUCESTER:
A gentle cousin, were it light enough.

YORK:
O, then, I see, you will part but with light gifts;
In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.

GLOUCESTER:
It is too heavy for your grace to wear.

YORK:
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.

GLOUCESTER:
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?

YORK:
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.

GLOUCESTER:
How?

YORK:
Little.

PRINCE EDWARD:
My Lord of York will still be cross in talk:
Uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.

YORK:
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me:
Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me;
Because that I am little, like an ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.

BUCKINGHAM:
With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!
To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself:
So cunning and so young is wonderful.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord, will't please you pass along?
Myself and my good cousin Buckingham
Will to your mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.

YORK:
What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?

PRINCE EDWARD:
My lord protector needs will have it so.

YORK:
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, what should you fear?

YORK:
Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost:
My grandam told me he was murdered there.

PRINCE EDWARD:
I fear no uncles dead.

GLOUCESTER:
Nor none that live, I hope.

PRINCE EDWARD:
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.
But come, my lord; and with a heavy heart,
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.

BUCKINGHAM:
Think you, my lord, this little prating York
Was not incensed by his subtle mother
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?

GLOUCESTER:
No doubt, no doubt; O, 'tis a parlous boy;
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable
He is all the mother's, from the top to toe.

BUCKINGHAM:
Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby.
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend
As closely to conceal what we impart:
Thou know'st our reasons urged upon the way;
What think'st thou? is it not an easy matter
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind,
For the instalment of this noble duke
In the seat royal of this famous isle?

CATESBY:
He for his father's sake so loves the prince,
That he will not be won to aught against him.

BUCKINGHAM:
What think'st thou, then, of Stanley? what will he?

CATESBY:
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.

BUCKINGHAM:
Well, then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,
And, as it were far off sound thou Lord Hastings,
How doth he stand affected to our purpose;
And summon him to-morrow to the Tower,
To sit about the coronation.
If thou dost find him tractable to us,
Encourage him, and show him all our reasons:
If he be leaden, icy-cold, unwilling,
Be thou so too; and so break off your talk,
And give us notice of his inclination:
For we to-morrow hold divided councils,
Wherein thyself shalt highly be employ'd.

GLOUCESTER:
Commend me to Lord William: tell him, Catesby,
His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret-castle;
And bid my friend, for joy of this good news,
Give mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.

BUCKINGHAM:
Good Catesby, go, effect this business soundly.

CATESBY:
My good lords both, with all the heed I may.

GLOUCESTER:
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?

CATESBY:
You shall, my lord.

GLOUCESTER:
At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.

BUCKINGHAM:
Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive
Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?

GLOUCESTER:
Chop off his head, man; somewhat we will do:
And, look, when I am king, claim thou of me
The earldom of Hereford, and the moveables
Whereof the king my brother stood possess'd.

BUCKINGHAM:
I'll claim that promise at your grace's hands.

GLOUCESTER:
And look to have it yielded with all willingness.
Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards
We may digest our complots in some form.

Messenger:
What, ho! my lord!

HASTINGS:

Messenger:
A messenger from the Lord Stanley.

HASTINGS:
What is't o'clock?

Messenger:
Upon the stroke of four.

HASTINGS:
Cannot thy master sleep these tedious nights?

Messenger:
So it should seem by that I have to say.
First, he commends him to your noble lordship.

HASTINGS:
And then?

Messenger:
And then he sends you word
He dreamt to-night the boar had razed his helm:
Besides, he says there are two councils held;
And that may be determined at the one
which may make you and him to rue at the other.
Therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure,
If presently you will take horse with him,
And with all speed post with him toward the north,
To shun the danger that his soul divines.

HASTINGS:
Go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord;
Bid him not fear the separated councils
His honour and myself are at the one,
And at the other is my servant Catesby
Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
Tell him his fears are shallow, wanting instance:
And for his dreams, I wonder he is so fond
To trust the mockery of unquiet slumbers
To fly the boar before the boar pursues,
Were to incense the boar to follow us
And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy master rise and come to me
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.

Messenger:
My gracious lord, I'll tell him what you say.

CATESBY:
Many good morrows to my noble lord!

HASTINGS:
Good morrow, Catesby; you are early stirring
What news, what news, in this our tottering state?

CATESBY:
It is a reeling world, indeed, my lord;
And I believe twill never stand upright
Tim Richard wear the garland of the realm.

HASTINGS:
How! wear the garland! dost thou mean the crown?

CATESBY:
Ay, my good lord.

HASTINGS:
I'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders
Ere I will see the crown so foul misplaced.
But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?

CATESBY:
Ay, on my life; and hopes to find forward
Upon his party for the gain thereof:
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies,
The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret.

HASTINGS:
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still mine enemies:
But, that I'll give my voice on Richard's side,
To bar my master's heirs in true descent,
God knows I will not do it, to the death.

CATESBY:
God keep your lordship in that gracious mind!

HASTINGS:
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,
That they who brought me in my master's hate
I live to look upon their tragedy.
I tell thee, Catesby--

CATESBY:
What, my lord?

HASTINGS:
Ere a fortnight make me elder,
I'll send some packing that yet think not on it.

CATESBY:
'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord,
When men are unprepared and look not for it.

HASTINGS:
O monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out
With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey: and so 'twill do
With some men else, who think themselves as safe
As thou and I; who, as thou know'st, are dear
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.

CATESBY:
The princes both make high account of you;
For they account his head upon the bridge.

HASTINGS:
I know they do; and I have well deserved it.
Come on, come on; where is your boar-spear, man?
Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?

STANLEY:
My lord, good morrow; good morrow, Catesby:
You may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
I do not like these several councils, I.

HASTINGS:
My lord,
I hold my life as dear as you do yours;
And never in my life, I do protest,
Was it more precious to me than 'tis now:
Think you, but that I know our state secure,
I would be so triumphant as I am?

STANLEY:
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,
Were jocund, and supposed their state was sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
But yet, you see how soon the day o'ercast.
This sudden stag of rancour I misdoubt:
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!
What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.

HASTINGS:
Come, come, have with you. Wot you what, my lord?
To-day the lords you talk of are beheaded.

LORD STANLEY:
They, for their truth, might better wear their heads
Than some that have accused them wear their hats.
But come, my lord, let us away.

HASTINGS:
Go on before; I'll talk with this good fellow.
How now, sirrah! how goes the world with thee?

Pursuivant:
The better that your lordship please to ask.

HASTINGS:
I tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now
Than when I met thee last where now we meet:
Then was I going prisoner to the Tower,
By the suggestion of the queen's allies;
But now, I tell thee--keep it to thyself--
This day those enemies are put to death,
And I in better state than e'er I was.

Pursuivant:
God hold it, to your honour's good content!

HASTINGS:
Gramercy, fellow: there, drink that for me.

Pursuivant:
God save your lordship!

Priest:
Well met, my lord; I am glad to see your honour.

HASTINGS:
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.
I am in your debt for your last exercise;
Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.

BUCKINGHAM:
What, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest;
Your honour hath no shriving work in hand.

HASTINGS:
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
Those men you talk of came into my mind.
What, go you toward the Tower?

BUCKINGHAM:
I do, my lord; but long I shall not stay
I shall return before your lordship thence.

HASTINGS:
'Tis like enough, for I stay dinner there.

BUCKINGHAM:

HASTINGS:
I'll wait upon your lordship.

RATCLIFF:
Come, bring forth the prisoners.

RIVERS:
Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this:
To-day shalt thou behold a subject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.

GREY:
God keep the prince from all the pack of you!
A knot you are of damned blood-suckers!

VAUGHAN:
You live that shall cry woe for this after.

RATCLIFF:
Dispatch; the limit of your lives is out.

RIVERS:
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls
Richard the second here was hack'd to death;
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.

GREY:
Now Margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads,
For standing by when Richard stabb'd her son.

RIVERS:
Then cursed she Hastings, then cursed she Buckingham,
Then cursed she Richard. O, remember, God
To hear her prayers for them, as now for us
And for my sister and her princely sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.

RATCLIFF:
Make haste; the hour of death is expiate.

RIVERS:
Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us all embrace:
And take our leave, until we meet in heaven.

HASTINGS:
My lords, at once: the cause why we are met
Is, to determine of the coronation.
In God's name, speak: when is the royal day?

BUCKINGHAM:
Are all things fitting for that royal time?

DERBY:
It is, and wants but nomination.

BISHOP OF ELY:
To-morrow, then, I judge a happy day.

BUCKINGHAM:
Who knows the lord protector's mind herein?
Who is most inward with the royal duke?

BISHOP OF ELY:
Your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.

BUCKINGHAM:
Who, I, my lord I we know each other's faces,
But for our hearts, he knows no more of mine,
Than I of yours;
Nor I no more of his, than you of mine.
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.

HASTINGS:
I thank his grace, I know he loves me well;
But, for his purpose in the coronation.
I have not sounded him, nor he deliver'd
His gracious pleasure any way therein:
But you, my noble lords, may name the time;
And in the duke's behalf I'll give my voice,
Which, I presume, he'll take in gentle part.

BISHOP OF ELY:
Now in good time, here comes the duke himself.

GLOUCESTER:
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.
I have been long a sleeper; but, I hope,
My absence doth neglect no great designs,
Which by my presence might have been concluded.

BUCKINGHAM:
Had not you come upon your cue, my lord
William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part,--
I mean, your voice,--for crowning of the king.

GLOUCESTER:
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder;
His lordship knows me well, and loves me well.

HASTINGS:
I thank your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord of Ely!

BISHOP OF ELY:
My lord?

GLOUCESTER:
When I was last in Holborn,
I saw good strawberries in your garden there
I do beseech you send for some of them.

BISHOP OF ELY:
Marry, and will, my lord, with all my heart.

GLOUCESTER:
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.
Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business,
And finds the testy gentleman so hot,
As he will lose his head ere give consent
His master's son, as worshipful as he terms it,
Shall lose the royalty of England's throne.

BUCKINGHAM:
Withdraw you hence, my lord, I'll follow you.

DERBY:
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.
To-morrow, in mine opinion, is too sudden;
For I myself am not so well provided
As else I would be, were the day prolong'd.

BISHOP OF ELY:
Where is my lord protector? I have sent for these
strawberries.

HASTINGS:
His grace looks cheerfully and smooth to-day;
There's some conceit or other likes him well,
When he doth bid good morrow with such a spirit.
I think there's never a man in Christendom
That can less hide his love or hate than he;
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.

DERBY:
What of his heart perceive you in his face
By any likelihood he show'd to-day?

HASTINGS:
Marry, that with no man here he is offended;
For, were he, he had shown it in his looks.

DERBY:
I pray God he be not, I say.

GLOUCESTER:
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve
That do conspire my death with devilish plots
Of damned witchcraft, and that have prevail'd
Upon my body with their hellish charms?

HASTINGS:
The tender love I bear your grace, my lord,
Makes me most forward in this noble presence
To doom the offenders, whatsoever they be
I say, my lord, they have deserved death.

GLOUCESTER:
Then be your eyes the witness of this ill:
See how I am bewitch'd; behold mine arm
Is, like a blasted sapling, wither'd up:
And this is Edward's wife, that monstrous witch,
Consorted with that harlot strumpet Shore,
That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.

HASTINGS:
If they have done this thing, my gracious lord--

GLOUCESTER:
If I thou protector of this damned strumpet--
Tellest thou me of 'ifs'?  Thou art a traitor:
Off with his head! Now, by Saint Paul I swear,
I will not dine until I see the same.
Lovel and Ratcliff, look that it be done:
The rest, that love me, rise and follow me.

HASTINGS:
Woe, woe for England! not a whit for me;
For I, too fond, might have prevented this.
Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm;
But I disdain'd it, and did scorn to fly:
Three times to-day my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
And startled, when he look'd upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.
O, now I want the priest that spake to me:
I now repent I told the pursuivant
As 'twere triumphing at mine enemies,
How they at Pomfret bloodily were butcher'd,
And I myself secure in grace and favour.
O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse
Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head!

RATCLIFF:
Dispatch, my lord; the duke would be at dinner:
Make a short shrift; he longs to see your head.

HASTINGS:
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hopes in air of your good looks,
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready, with every nod, to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.

LOVEL:
Come, come, dispatch; 'tis bootless to exclaim.

HASTINGS:
O bloody Richard! miserable England!
I prophesy the fearful'st time to thee
That ever wretched age hath look'd upon.
Come, lead me to the block; bear him my head.
They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.

GLOUCESTER:
Come, cousin, canst thou quake, and change thy colour,
Murder thy breath in the middle of a word,
And then begin again, and stop again,
As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?

BUCKINGHAM:
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian;
Speak and look back, and pry on every side,
Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,
Intending deep suspicion: ghastly looks
Are at my service, like enforced smiles;
And both are ready in their offices,
At any time, to grace my stratagems.
But what, is Catesby gone?

GLOUCESTER:
He is; and, see, he brings the mayor along.

BUCKINGHAM:
Lord mayor,--

GLOUCESTER:
Look to the drawbridge there!

BUCKINGHAM:
Hark! a drum.

GLOUCESTER:
Catesby, o'erlook the walls.

BUCKINGHAM:
Lord mayor, the reason we have sent--

GLOUCESTER:
Look back, defend thee, here are enemies.

BUCKINGHAM:
God and our innocency defend and guard us!

GLOUCESTER:
Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliff and Lovel.

LOVEL:
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.

GLOUCESTER:
So dear I loved the man, that I must weep.
I took him for the plainest harmless creature
That breathed upon this earth a Christian;
Made him my book wherein my soul recorded
The history of all her secret thoughts:
So smooth he daub'd his vice with show of virtue,
That, his apparent open guilt omitted,
I mean, his conversation with Shore's wife,
He lived from all attainder of suspect.

BUCKINGHAM:
Well, well, he was the covert'st shelter'd traitor
That ever lived.
Would you imagine, or almost believe,
Were't not that, by great preservation,
We live to tell it you, the subtle traitor
This day had plotted, in the council-house
To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester?

Lord Mayor:
What, had he so?

GLOUCESTER:
What, think You we are Turks or infidels?
Or that we would, against the form of law,
Proceed thus rashly to the villain's death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The peace of England and our persons' safety,
Enforced us to this execution?

Lord Mayor:
Now, fair befall you! he deserved his death;
And you my good lords, both have well proceeded,
To warn false traitors from the like attempts.
I never look'd for better at his hands,
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.

GLOUCESTER:
Yet had not we determined he should die,
Until your lordship came to see his death;
Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
Somewhat against our meaning, have prevented:
Because, my lord, we would have had you heard
The traitor speak, and timorously confess
The manner and the purpose of his treason;
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the citizens, who haply may
Misconstrue us in him and wail his death.

Lord Mayor:
But, my good lord, your grace's word shall serve,
As well as I had seen and heard him speak
And doubt you not, right noble princes both,
But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens
With all your just proceedings in this cause.

GLOUCESTER:
And to that end we wish'd your lord-ship here,
To avoid the carping censures of the world.

BUCKINGHAM:
But since you come too late of our intents,
Yet witness what you hear we did intend:
And so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.

GLOUCESTER:
Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham.
The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post:
There, at your meet'st advantage of the time,
Infer the bastardy of Edward's children:
Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen,
Only for saying he would make his son
Heir to the crown; meaning indeed his house,
Which, by the sign thereof was termed so.
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury
And bestial appetite in change of lust;
Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives,
Even where his lustful eye or savage heart,
Without control, listed to make his prey.
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:
Tell them, when that my mother went with child
Of that unsatiate Edward, noble York
My princely father then had wars in France
And, by just computation of the time,
Found that the issue was not his begot;
Which well appeared in his lineaments,
Being nothing like the noble duke my father:
But touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off,
Because you know, my lord, my mother lives.

BUCKINGHAM:
Fear not, my lord, I'll play the orator
As if the golden fee for which I plead
Were for myself: and so, my lord, adieu.

GLOUCESTER:
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle;
Where you shall find me well accompanied
With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.

BUCKINGHAM:
I go: and towards three or four o'clock
Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.

GLOUCESTER:
Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw;
Go thou to Friar Penker; bid them both
Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle.
Now will I in, to take some privy order,
To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight;
And to give notice, that no manner of person
At any time have recourse unto the princes.

Scrivener:
This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings;
Which in a set hand fairly is engross'd,
That it may be this day read over in Paul's.
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
Eleven hours I spent to write it over,
For yesternight by Catesby was it brought me;
The precedent was full as long a-doing:
And yet within these five hours lived Lord Hastings,
Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty
Here's a good world the while! Why who's so gross,
That seeth not this palpable device?
Yet who's so blind, but says he sees it not?
Bad is the world; and all will come to nought,
When such bad dealings must be seen in thought.

GLOUCESTER:
How now, my lord, what say the citizens?

BUCKINGHAM:
Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,
The citizens are mum and speak not a word.

GLOUCESTER:
Touch'd you the bastardy of Edward's children?

BUCKINGHAM:
I did; with his contract with Lady Lucy,
And his contract by deputy in France;
The insatiate greediness of his desires,
And his enforcement of the city wives;
His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,
As being got, your father then in France,
His resemblance, being not like the duke;
Withal I did infer your lineaments,
Being the right idea of your father,
Both in your form and nobleness of mind;
Laid open all your victories in Scotland,
Your dicipline in war, wisdom in peace,
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility:
Indeed, left nothing fitting for the purpose
Untouch'd, or slightly handled, in discourse
And when mine oratory grew to an end
I bid them that did love their country's good
Cry 'God save Richard, England's royal king!'

GLOUCESTER:
Ah! and did they so?

BUCKINGHAM:
No, so God help me, they spake not a word;
But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,
Gazed each on other, and look'd deadly pale.
Which when I saw, I reprehended them;
And ask'd the mayor what meant this wilful silence:
His answer was, the people were not wont
To be spoke to but by the recorder.
Then he was urged to tell my tale again,
'Thus saith the duke, thus hath the duke inferr'd;'
But nothing spake in warrant from himself.
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
At the lower end of the hall, hurl'd up their caps,
And some ten voices cried 'God save King Richard!'
And thus I took the vantage of those few,
'Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,' quoth I;
'This general applause and loving shout
Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard:'
And even here brake off, and came away.

GLOUCESTER:
What tongueless blocks were they! would not they speak?

BUCKINGHAM:
No, by my troth, my lord.

GLOUCESTER:
Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?

BUCKINGHAM:
The mayor is here at hand: intend some fear;
Be not you spoke with, but by mighty suit:
And look you get a prayer-book in your hand,
And stand betwixt two churchmen, good my lord;
For on that ground I'll build a holy descant:
And be not easily won to our request:
Play the maid's part, still answer nay, and take it.

GLOUCESTER:
I go; and if you plead as well for them
As I can say nay to thee for myself,
No doubt well bring it to a happy issue.

BUCKINGHAM:
Go, go, up to the leads; the lord mayor knocks.
Welcome my lord; I dance attendance here;
I think the duke will not be spoke withal.
Here comes his servant: how now, Catesby,
What says he?

CATESBY:
My lord: he doth entreat your grace;
To visit him to-morrow or next day:
He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation;
And no worldly suit would he be moved,
To draw him from his holy exercise.

BUCKINGHAM:
Return, good Catesby, to thy lord again;
Tell him, myself, the mayor and citizens,
In deep designs and matters of great moment,
No less importing than our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his grace.

CATESBY:
I'll tell him what you say, my lord.

BUCKINGHAM:
Ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!
He is not lolling on a lewd day-bed,
But on his knees at meditation;
Not dallying with a brace of courtezans,
But meditating with two deep divines;
Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,
But praying, to enrich his watchful soul:
Happy were England, would this gracious prince
Take on himself the sovereignty thereof:
But, sure, I fear, we shall ne'er win him to it.

Lord Mayor:
Marry, God forbid his grace should say us nay!

BUCKINGHAM:
I fear he will.
How now, Catesby, what says your lord?

CATESBY:
My lord,
He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of citizens to speak with him,
His grace not being warn'd thereof before:
My lord, he fears you mean no good to him.

BUCKINGHAM:
Sorry I am my noble cousin should
Suspect me, that I mean no good to him:
By heaven, I come in perfect love to him;
And so once more return and tell his grace.
When holy and devout religious men
Are at their beads, 'tis hard to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous contemplation.

Lord Mayor:
See, where he stands between two clergymen!

BUCKINGHAM:
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,
To stay him from the fall of vanity:
And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,
True ornaments to know a holy man.
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,
Lend favourable ears to our request;
And pardon us the interruption
Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord, there needs no such apology:
I rather do beseech you pardon me,
Who, earnest in the service of my God,
Neglect the visitation of my friends.
But, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure?

BUCKINGHAM:
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above,
And all good men of this ungovern'd isle.

GLOUCESTER:
I do suspect I have done some offence
That seems disgracious in the city's eyes,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.

BUCKINGHAM:
You have, my lord: would it might please your grace,
At our entreaties, to amend that fault!

GLOUCESTER:
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?

BUCKINGHAM:
Then know, it is your fault that you resign
The supreme seat, the throne majestical,
The scepter'd office of your ancestors,
Your state of fortune and your due of birth,
The lineal glory of your royal house,
To the corruption of a blemished stock:
Whilst, in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
Which here we waken to our country's good,
This noble isle doth want her proper limbs;
Her face defaced with scars of infamy,
Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,
And almost shoulder'd in the swallowing gulf
Of blind forgetfulness and dark oblivion.
Which to recure, we heartily solicit
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land,
Not as protector, steward, substitute,
Or lowly factor for another's gain;
But as successively from blood to blood,
Your right of birth, your empery, your own.
For this, consorted with the citizens,
Your very worshipful and loving friends,
And by their vehement instigation,
In this just suit come I to move your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
I know not whether to depart in silence,
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof.
Best fitteth my degree or your condition
If not to answer, you might haply think
Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded
To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
Which fondly you would here impose on me;
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
So season'd with your faithful love to me.
Then, on the other side, I cheque'd my friends.
Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,
And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,
Definitively thus I answer you.
Your love deserves my thanks; but my desert
Unmeritable shuns your high request.
First if all obstacles were cut away,
And that my path were even to the crown,
As my ripe revenue and due by birth
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty and so many my defects,
As I had rather hide me from my greatness,
Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,
Than in my greatness covet to be hid,
And in the vapour of my glory smother'd.
But, God be thank'd, there's no need of me,
And much I need to help you, if need were;
The royal tree hath left us royal fruit,
Which, mellow'd by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the seat of majesty,
And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.
On him I lay what you would lay on me,
The right and fortune of his happy stars;
Which God defend that I should wring from him!

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, this argues conscience in your grace;
But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,
All circumstances well considered.
You say that Edward is your brother's son:
So say we too, but not by Edward's wife;
For first he was contract to Lady Lucy--
Your mother lives a witness to that vow--
And afterward by substitute betroth'd
To Bona, sister to the King of France.
These both put by a poor petitioner,
A care-crazed mother of a many children,
A beauty-waning and distressed widow,
Even in the afternoon of her best days,
Made prize and purchase of his lustful eye,
Seduced the pitch and height of all his thoughts
To base declension and loathed bigamy
By her, in his unlawful bed, he got
This Edward, whom our manners term the prince.
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that, for reverence to some alive,
I give a sparing limit to my tongue.
Then, good my lord, take to your royal self
This proffer'd benefit of dignity;
If non to bless us and the land withal,
Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry
From the corruption of abusing times,
Unto a lineal true-derived course.

Lord Mayor:
Do, good my lord, your citizens entreat you.

BUCKINGHAM:
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffer'd love.

CATESBY:
O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!

GLOUCESTER:
Alas, why would you heap these cares on me?
I am unfit for state and majesty;
I do beseech you, take it not amiss;
I cannot nor I will not yield to you.

BUCKINGHAM:
If you refuse it,--as, in love and zeal,
Loath to depose the child, Your brother's son;
As well we know your tenderness of heart
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
Which we have noted in you to your kin,
And egally indeed to all estates,--
Yet whether you accept our suit or no,
Your brother's son shall never reign our king;
But we will plant some other in the throne,
To the disgrace and downfall of your house:
And in this resolution here we leave you.--
Come, citizens: 'zounds! I'll entreat no more.

GLOUCESTER:
O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham.

CATESBY:
Call them again, my lord, and accept their suit.

ANOTHER:
Do, good my lord, lest all the land do rue it.

GLOUCESTER:
Would you enforce me to a world of care?
Well, call them again. I am not made of stone,
But penetrable to your. kind entreats,
Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
Cousin of Buckingham, and you sage, grave men,
Since you will buckle fortune on my back,
To bear her burthen, whether I will or no,
I must have patience to endure the load:
But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach
Attend the sequel of your imposition,
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and stains thereof;
For God he knows, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire thereof.

Lord Mayor:
God bless your grace! we see it, and will say it.

GLOUCESTER:
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.

BUCKINGHAM:
Then I salute you with this kingly title:
Long live Richard, England's royal king!

Lord Mayor:
Amen.

BUCKINGHAM:
To-morrow will it please you to be crown'd?

GLOUCESTER:
Even when you please, since you will have it so.

BUCKINGHAM:
To-morrow, then, we will attend your grace:
And so most joyfully we take our leave.

GLOUCESTER:
Come, let us to our holy task again.
Farewell, good cousin; farewell, gentle friends.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Who meets us here?  my niece Plantagenet
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?
Now, for my life, she's wandering to the Tower,
On pure heart's love to greet the tender princes.
Daughter, well met.

LADY ANNE:
God give your graces both
A happy and a joyful time of day!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
As much to you, good sister! Whither away?

LADY ANNE:
No farther than the Tower; and, as I guess,
Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
To gratulate the gentle princes there.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Kind sister, thanks: we'll enter all together.
And, in good time, here the lieutenant comes.
Master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How doth the prince, and my young son of York?

BRAKENBURY:
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,
I may not suffer you to visit them;
The king hath straitly charged the contrary.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The king! why, who's that?

BRAKENBURY:
I cry you mercy: I mean the lord protector.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The Lord protect him from that kingly title!
Hath he set bounds betwixt their love and me?
I am their mother; who should keep me from them?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I am their fathers mother; I will see them.

LADY ANNE:
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother:
Then bring me to their sights; I'll bear thy blame
And take thy office from thee, on my peril.

BRAKENBURY:
No, madam, no; I may not leave it so:
I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.

LORD STANLEY:
Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence,
And I'll salute your grace of York as mother,
And reverend looker on, of two fair queens.
Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster,
There to be crowned Richard's royal queen.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O, cut my lace in sunder, that my pent heart
May have some scope to beat, or else I swoon
With this dead-killing news!

LADY ANNE:
Despiteful tidings! O unpleasing news!

DORSET:
Be of good cheer: mother, how fares your grace?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee hence!
Death and destruction dog thee at the heels;
Thy mother's name is ominous to children.
If thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell
Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead;
And make me die the thrall of Margaret's curse,
Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen.

LORD STANLEY:
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
Take all the swift advantage of the hours;
You shall have letters from me to my son
To meet you on the way, and welcome you.
Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!
O my accursed womb, the bed of death!
A cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world,
Whose unavoided eye is murderous.

LORD STANLEY:
Come, madam, come; I in all haste was sent.

LADY ANNE:
And I in all unwillingness will go.
I would to God that the inclusive verge
Of golden metal that must round my brow
Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brain!
Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
And die, ere men can say, God save the queen!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory
To feed my humour, wish thyself no harm.

LADY ANNE:
No! why?  When he that is my husband now
Came to me, as I follow'd Henry's corse,
When scarce the blood was well wash'd from his hands
Which issued from my other angel husband
And that dead saint which then I weeping follow'd;
O, when, I say, I look'd on Richard's face,
This was my wish: 'Be thou,' quoth I, ' accursed,
For making me, so young, so old a widow!
And, when thou wed'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed;
And be thy wife--if any be so mad--
As miserable by the life of thee
As thou hast made me by my dear lord's death!
Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again,
Even in so short a space, my woman's heart
Grossly grew captive to his honey words
And proved the subject of my own soul's curse,
Which ever since hath kept my eyes from rest;
For never yet one hour in his bed
Have I enjoy'd the golden dew of sleep,
But have been waked by his timorous dreams.
Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick;
And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Poor heart, adieu! I pity thy complaining.

LADY ANNE:
No more than from my soul I mourn for yours.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Farewell, thou woful welcomer of glory!

LADY ANNE:
Adieu, poor soul, that takest thy leave of it!

DUCHESS OF YORK:

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.
Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes
Whom envy hath immured within your walls!
Rough cradle for such little pretty ones!
Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow
For tender princes, use my babies well!
So foolish sorrow bids your stones farewell.

KING RICHARD III:
Stand all apart Cousin of Buckingham!

BUCKINGHAM:
My gracious sovereign?

KING RICHARD III:
Give me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy advice
And thy assistance, is King Richard seated;
But shall we wear these honours for a day?
Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?

BUCKINGHAM:
Still live they and for ever may they last!

KING RICHARD III:
O Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
To try if thou be current gold indeed
Young Edward lives: think now what I would say.

BUCKINGHAM:
Say on, my loving lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Why, Buckingham, I say, I would be king,

BUCKINGHAM:
Why, so you are, my thrice renowned liege.

KING RICHARD III:
Ha! am I king? 'tis so: but Edward lives.

BUCKINGHAM:
True, noble prince.

KING RICHARD III:
O bitter consequence,
That Edward still should live! 'True, noble prince!'
Cousin, thou wert not wont to be so dull:
Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead;
And I would have it suddenly perform'd.
What sayest thou? speak suddenly; be brief.

BUCKINGHAM:
Your grace may do your pleasure.

KING RICHARD III:
Tut, tut, thou art all ice, thy kindness freezeth:
Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?

BUCKINGHAM:
Give me some breath, some little pause, my lord
Before I positively herein:
I will resolve your grace immediately.

CATESBY:

KING RICHARD III:
I will converse with iron-witted fools
And unrespective boys: none are for me
That look into me with considerate eyes:
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
Boy!

Page:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold
Would tempt unto a close exploit of death?

Page:
My lord, I know a discontented gentleman,
Whose humble means match not his haughty mind:
Gold were as good as twenty orators,
And will, no doubt, tempt him to any thing.

KING RICHARD III:
What is his name?

Page:
His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.

KING RICHARD III:
I partly know the man: go, call him hither.
The deep-revolving witty Buckingham
No more shall be the neighbour to my counsel:
Hath he so long held out with me untired,
And stops he now for breath?
How now! what news with you?

STANLEY:
My lord, I hear the Marquis Dorset's fled
To Richmond, in those parts beyond the sea
Where he abides.

KING RICHARD III:
Catesby!

CATESBY:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Rumour it abroad
That Anne, my wife, is sick and like to die:
I will take order for her keeping close.
Inquire me out some mean-born gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter:
The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
Look, how thou dream'st! I say again, give out
That Anne my wife is sick and like to die:
About it; for it stands me much upon,
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
I must be married to my brother's daughter,
Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
Murder her brothers, and then marry her!
Uncertain way of gain! But I am in
So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin:
Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
Is thy name Tyrrel?

TYRREL:
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.

KING RICHARD III:
Art thou, indeed?

TYRREL:
Prove me, my gracious sovereign.

KING RICHARD III:
Darest thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?

TYRREL:
Ay, my lord;
But I had rather kill two enemies.

KING RICHARD III:
Why, there thou hast it: two deep enemies,
Foes to my rest and my sweet sleep's disturbers
Are they that I would have thee deal upon:
Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.

TYRREL:
Let me have open means to come to them,
And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them.

KING RICHARD III:
Thou sing'st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel
Go, by this token: rise, and lend thine ear:
There is no more but so: say it is done,
And I will love thee, and prefer thee too.

TYRREL:
'Tis done, my gracious lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Shall we hear from thee, Tyrrel, ere we sleep?

TYRREL:
Ye shall, my Lord.

BUCKINGHAM:
My Lord, I have consider'd in my mind
The late demand that you did sound me in.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, let that pass. Dorset is fled to Richmond.

BUCKINGHAM:
I hear that news, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Stanley, he is your wife's son well, look to it.

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, I claim your gift, my due by promise,
For which your honour and your faith is pawn'd;
The earldom of Hereford and the moveables
The which you promised I should possess.

KING RICHARD III:
Stanley, look to your wife; if she convey
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.

BUCKINGHAM:
What says your highness to my just demand?

KING RICHARD III:
As I remember, Henry the Sixth
Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,
When Richmond was a little peevish boy.
A king, perhaps, perhaps,--

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord!

KING RICHARD III:
How chance the prophet could not at that time
Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, your promise for the earldom,--

KING RICHARD III:
Richmond! When last I was at Exeter,
The mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle,
And call'd it Rougemont: at which name I started,
Because a bard of Ireland told me once
I should not live long after I saw Richmond.

BUCKINGHAM:
My Lord!

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, what's o'clock?

BUCKINGHAM:
I am thus bold to put your grace in mind
Of what you promised me.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, but what's o'clock?

BUCKINGHAM:
Upon the stroke of ten.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, let it strike.

BUCKINGHAM:
Why let it strike?

KING RICHARD III:
Because that, like a Jack, thou keep'st the stroke
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
I am not in the giving vein to-day.

BUCKINGHAM:
Why, then resolve me whether you will or no.

KING RICHARD III:
Tut, tut,
Thou troublest me; am not in the vein.

BUCKINGHAM:
Is it even so? rewards he my true service
With such deep contempt made I him king for this?
O, let me think on Hastings, and be gone
To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!

TYRREL:
The tyrannous and bloody deed is done.
The most arch of piteous massacre
That ever yet this land was guilty of.
Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn
To do this ruthless piece of butchery,
Although they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs,
Melting with tenderness and kind compassion
Wept like two children in their deaths' sad stories.
'Lo, thus' quoth Dighton, 'lay those tender babes:'
'Thus, thus,' quoth Forrest, 'girdling one another
Within their innocent alabaster arms:
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,
Which in their summer beauty kiss'd each other.
A book of prayers on their pillow lay;
Which once,' quoth Forrest, 'almost changed my mind;
But O! the devil'--there the villain stopp'd
Whilst Dighton thus told on: 'We smothered
The most replenished sweet work of nature,
That from the prime creation e'er she framed.'
Thus both are gone with conscience and remorse;
They could not speak; and so I left them both,
To bring this tidings to the bloody king.
And here he comes.
All hail, my sovereign liege!

KING RICHARD III:
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?

TYRREL:
If to have done the thing you gave in charge
Beget your happiness, be happy then,
For it is done, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
But didst thou see them dead?

TYRREL:
I did, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?

TYRREL:
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them;
But how or in what place I do not know.

KING RICHARD III:
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper,
And thou shalt tell the process of their death.
Meantime, but think how I may do thee good,
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Farewell till soon.
The son of Clarence have I pent up close;
His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage;
The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
And Anne my wife hath bid the world good night.
Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
And, by that knot, looks proudly o'er the crown,
To her I go, a jolly thriving wooer.

CATESBY:
My lord!

KING RICHARD III:
Good news or bad, that thou comest in so bluntly?

CATESBY:
Bad news, my lord: Ely is fled to Richmond;
And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen,
Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.

KING RICHARD III:
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
Than Buckingham and his rash-levied army.
Come, I have heard that fearful commenting
Is leaden servitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king!
Come, muster men: my counsel is my shield;
We must be brief when traitors brave the field.

QUEEN MARGARET:
So, now prosperity begins to mellow
And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
Here in these confines slily have I lurk'd,
To watch the waning of mine adversaries.
A dire induction am I witness to,
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret: who comes here?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Ah, my young princes! ah, my tender babes!
My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets!
If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
And be not fix'd in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your airy wings
And hear your mother's lamentation!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Hover about her; say, that right for right
Hath dimm'd your infant morn to aged night.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
So many miseries have crazed my voice,
That my woe-wearied tongue is mute and dumb,
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet.
Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs,
And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?

QUEEN MARGARET:
When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Blind sight, dead life, poor mortal living ghost,
Woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurp'd,
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Rest thy unrest on England's lawful earth,
Unlawfully made drunk with innocents' blood!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O, that thou wouldst as well afford a grave
As thou canst yield a melancholy seat!
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
O, who hath any cause to mourn but I?

QUEEN MARGARET:
If ancient sorrow be most reverend,
Give mine the benefit of seniory,
And let my woes frown on the upper hand.
If sorrow can admit society,
Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine:
I had an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him;
I had a Harry, till a Richard kill'd him:
Thou hadst an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him;
Thou hadst a Richard, till a Richard killed him;

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him;
I had a Rutland too, thou holp'st to kill him.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard kill'd him.
From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
A hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death:
That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood,
That foul defacer of God's handiwork,
That excellent grand tyrant of the earth,
That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls,
Thy womb let loose, to chase us to our graves.
O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
How do I thank thee, that this carnal cur
Preys on the issue of his mother's body,
And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O Harry's wife, triumph not in my woes!
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Bear with me; I am hungry for revenge,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that stabb'd my Edward:
Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;
Young York he is but boot, because both they
Match not the high perfection of my loss:
Thy Clarence he is dead that kill'd my Edward;
And the beholders of this tragic play,
The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
Untimely smother'd in their dusky graves.
Richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer,
Only reserved their factor, to buy souls
And send them thither: but at hand, at hand,
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end:
Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray.
To have him suddenly convey'd away.
Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I prey,
That I may live to say, The dog is dead!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O, thou didst prophesy the time would come
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottled spider, that foul bunch-back'd toad!

QUEEN MARGARET:
I call'd thee then vain flourish of my fortune;
I call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen;
The presentation of but what I was;
The flattering index of a direful pageant;
One heaved a-high, to be hurl'd down below;
A mother only mock'd with two sweet babes;
A dream of what thou wert, a breath, a bubble,
A sign of dignity, a garish flag,
To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
Where is thy husband now? where be thy brothers?
Where are thy children? wherein dost thou, joy?
Who sues to thee and cries 'God save the queen'?
Where be the bending peers that flatter'd thee?
Where be the thronging troops that follow'd thee?
Decline all this, and see what now thou art:
For happy wife, a most distressed widow;
For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
For queen, a very caitiff crown'd with care;
For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;
For one that scorn'd at me, now scorn'd of me;
For one being fear'd of all, now fearing one;
For one commanding all, obey'd of none.
Thus hath the course of justice wheel'd about,
And left thee but a very prey to time;
Having no more but thought of what thou wert,
To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not
Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
Now thy proud neck bears half my burthen'd yoke;
From which even here I slip my weary neck,
And leave the burthen of it all on thee.
Farewell, York's wife, and queen of sad mischance:
These English woes will make me smile in France.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O thou well skill'd in curses, stay awhile,
And teach me how to curse mine enemies!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days;
Compare dead happiness with living woe;
Think that thy babes were fairer than they were,
And he that slew them fouler than he is:
Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse:
Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My words are dull; O, quicken them with thine!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thy woes will make them sharp, and pierce like mine.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why should calamity be full of words?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Windy attorneys to their client woes,
Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
Poor breathing orators of miseries!
Let them have scope: though what they do impart
Help not all, yet do they ease the heart.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
If so, then be not tongue-tied: go with me.
And in the breath of bitter words let's smother
My damned son, which thy two sweet sons smother'd.
I hear his drum: be copious in exclaims.

KING RICHARD III:
Who intercepts my expedition?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O, she that might have intercepted thee,
By strangling thee in her accursed womb
From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Hidest thou that forehead with a golden crown,
Where should be graven, if that right were right,
The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown,
And the dire death of my two sons and brothers?
Tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence?
And little Ned Plantagenet, his son?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Where is kind Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?

KING RICHARD III:
A flourish, trumpets! strike alarum, drums!
Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women
Rail on the Lord's enointed: strike, I say!
Either be patient, and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of war
Thus will I drown your exclamations.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Art thou my son?

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Then patiently hear my impatience.

KING RICHARD III:
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O, let me speak!

KING RICHARD III:
Do then: but I'll not hear.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I will be mild and gentle in my speech.

KING RICHARD III:
And brief, good mother; for I am in haste.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Art thou so hasty? I have stay'd for thee,
God knows, in anguish, pain and agony.

KING RICHARD III:
And came I not at last to comfort you?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
No, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well,
Thou camest on earth to make the earth my hell.
A grievous burthen was thy birth to me;
Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;
Thy school-days frightful, desperate, wild, and furious,
Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous,
Thy age confirm'd, proud, subdued, bloody,
treacherous,
More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred:
What comfortable hour canst thou name,
That ever graced me in thy company?

KING RICHARD III:
Faith, none, but Humphrey Hour, that call'd
your grace
To breakfast once forth of my company.
If I be so disgracious in your sight,
Let me march on, and not offend your grace.
Strike the drum.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I prithee, hear me speak.

KING RICHARD III:
You speak too bitterly.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Hear me a word;
For I shall never speak to thee again.

KING RICHARD III:
So.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Either thou wilt die, by God's just ordinance,
Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror,
Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish
And never look upon thy face again.
Therefore take with thee my most heavy curse;
Which, in the day of battle, tire thee more
Than all the complete armour that thou wear'st!
My prayers on the adverse party fight;
And there the little souls of Edward's children
Whisper the spirits of thine enemies
And promise them success and victory.
Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end;
Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse
Abides in me; I say amen to all.

KING RICHARD III:
Stay, madam; I must speak a word with you.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I have no more sons of the royal blood
For thee to murder: for my daughters, Richard,
They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens;
And therefore level not to hit their lives.

KING RICHARD III:
You have a daughter call'd Elizabeth,
Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
And must she die for this? O, let her live,
And I'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty;
Slander myself as false to Edward's bed;
Throw over her the veil of infamy:
So she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edward's daughter.

KING RICHARD III:
Wrong not her birth, she is of royal blood.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
To save her life, I'll say she is not so.

KING RICHARD III:
Her life is only safest in her birth.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
And only in that safety died her brothers.

KING RICHARD III:
Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
No, to their lives bad friends were contrary.

KING RICHARD III:
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
True, when avoided grace makes destiny:
My babes were destined to a fairer death,
If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.

KING RICHARD III:
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Cousins, indeed; and by their uncle cozen'd
Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
Whose hand soever lanced their tender hearts,
Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction:
No doubt the murderous knife was dull and blunt
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,
To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
Till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes;
And I, in such a desperate bay of death,
Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft,
Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.

KING RICHARD III:
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
And dangerous success of bloody wars,
As I intend more good to you and yours,
Than ever you or yours were by me wrong'd!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What good is cover'd with the face of heaven,
To be discover'd, that can do me good?

KING RICHARD III:
The advancement of your children, gentle lady.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads?

KING RICHARD III:
No, to the dignity and height of honour
The high imperial type of this earth's glory.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Flatter my sorrows with report of it;
Tell me what state, what dignity, what honour,
Canst thou demise to any child of mine?

KING RICHARD III:
Even all I have; yea, and myself and all,
Will I withal endow a child of thine;
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Be brief, lest that be process of thy kindness
Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.

KING RICHARD III:
Then know, that from my soul I love thy daughter.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My daughter's mother thinks it with her soul.

KING RICHARD III:
What do you think?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul:
So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers;
And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.

KING RICHARD III:
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning:
I mean, that with my soul I love thy daughter,
And mean to make her queen of England.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Say then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?

KING RICHARD III:
Even he that makes her queen who should be else?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What, thou?

KING RICHARD III:
I, even I: what think you of it, madam?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
How canst thou woo her?

KING RICHARD III:
That would I learn of you,
As one that are best acquainted with her humour.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
And wilt thou learn of me?

KING RICHARD III:
Madam, with all my heart.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,
A pair of bleeding-hearts; thereon engrave
Edward and York; then haply she will weep:
Therefore present to her--as sometime Margaret
Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood,--
A handkerchief; which, say to her, did drain
The purple sap from her sweet brother's body
And bid her dry her weeping eyes therewith.
If this inducement force her not to love,
Send her a story of thy noble acts;
Tell her thou madest away her uncle Clarence,
Her uncle Rivers; yea, and, for her sake,
Madest quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.

KING RICHARD III:
Come, come, you mock me; this is not the way
To win our daughter.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
There is no other way
Unless thou couldst put on some other shape,
And not be Richard that hath done all this.

KING RICHARD III:
Say that I did all this for love of her.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.

KING RICHARD III:
Look, what is done cannot be now amended:
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
Which after hours give leisure to repent.
If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
To make amends, Ill give it to your daughter.
If I have kill'd the issue of your womb,
To quicken your increase, I will beget
Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter
A grandam's name is little less in love
Than is the doting title of a mother;
They are as children but one step below,
Even of your mettle, of your very blood;
Of an one pain, save for a night of groans
Endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
Your children were vexation to your youth,
But mine shall be a comfort to your age.
The loss you have is but a son being king,
And by that loss your daughter is made queen.
I cannot make you what amends I would,
Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul
Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
This fair alliance quickly shall call home
To high promotions and great dignity:
The king, that calls your beauteous daughter wife.
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother;
Again shall you be mother to a king,
And all the ruins of distressful times
Repair'd with double riches of content.
What! we have many goodly days to see:
The liquid drops of tears that you have shed
Shall come again, transform'd to orient pearl,
Advantaging their loan with interest
Of ten times double gain of happiness.
Go, then my mother, to thy daughter go
Make bold her bashful years with your experience;
Prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale
Put in her tender heart the aspiring flame
Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the princess
With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys
And when this arm of mine hath chastised
The petty rebel, dull-brain'd Buckingham,
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come
And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
To whom I will retail my conquest won,
And she shall be sole victress, Caesar's Caesar.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What were I best to say? her father's brother
Would be her lord? or shall I say, her uncle?
Or, he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall I woo for thee,
That God, the law, my honour and her love,
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?

KING RICHARD III:
Infer fair England's peace by this alliance.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Which she shall purchase with still lasting war.

KING RICHARD III:
Say that the king, which may command, entreats.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
That at her hands which the king's King forbids.

KING RICHARD III:
Say, she shall be a high and mighty queen.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
To wail the tide, as her mother doth.

KING RICHARD III:
Say, I will love her everlastingly.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But how long shall that title 'ever' last?

KING RICHARD III:
Sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But how long fairly shall her sweet lie last?

KING RICHARD III:
So long as heaven and nature lengthens it.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
So long as hell and Richard likes of it.

KING RICHARD III:
Say, I, her sovereign, am her subject love.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.

KING RICHARD III:
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.

KING RICHARD III:
Then in plain terms tell her my loving tale.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.

KING RICHARD III:
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O no, my reasons are too deep and dead;
Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their grave.

KING RICHARD III:
Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.

KING RICHARD III:
Now, by my George, my garter, and my crown,--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Profaned, dishonour'd, and the third usurp'd.

KING RICHARD III:
I swear--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
By nothing; for this is no oath:
The George, profaned, hath lost his holy honour;
The garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue;
The crown, usurp'd, disgraced his kingly glory.
if something thou wilt swear to be believed,
Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.

KING RICHARD III:
Now, by the world--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.

KING RICHARD III:
My father's death--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thy life hath that dishonour'd.

KING RICHARD III:
Then, by myself--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thyself thyself misusest.

KING RICHARD III:
Why then, by God--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
God's wrong is most of all.
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
The unity the king thy brother made
Had not been broken, nor my brother slain:
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
The imperial metal, circling now thy brow,
Had graced the tender temples of my child,
And both the princes had been breathing here,
Which now, two tender playfellows to dust,
Thy broken faith hath made a prey for worms.
What canst thou swear by now?

KING RICHARD III:
The time to come.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
That thou hast wronged in the time o'erpast;
For I myself have many tears to wash
Hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee.
The children live, whose parents thou hast
slaughter'd,
Ungovern'd youth, to wail it in their age;
The parents live, whose children thou hast butcher'd,
Old wither'd plants, to wail it with their age.
Swear not by time to come; for that thou hast
Misused ere used, by time misused o'erpast.

KING RICHARD III:
As I intend to prosper and repent,
So thrive I in my dangerous attempt
Of hostile arms! myself myself confound!
Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours!
Day, yield me not thy light; nor, night, thy rest!
Be opposite all planets of good luck
To my proceedings, if, with pure heart's love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter!
In her consists my happiness and thine;
Without her, follows to this land and me,
To thee, herself, and many a Christian soul,
Death, desolation, ruin and decay:
It cannot be avoided but by this;
It will not be avoided but by this.
Therefore, good mother,--I must can you so--
Be the attorney of my love to her:
Plead what I will be, not what I have been;
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve:
Urge the necessity and state of times,
And be not peevish-fond in great designs.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, if the devil tempt thee to do good.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Shall I forget myself to be myself?

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, if yourself's remembrance wrong yourself.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But thou didst kill my children.

KING RICHARD III:
But in your daughter's womb I bury them:
Where in that nest of spicery they shall breed
Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?

KING RICHARD III:
And be a happy mother by the deed.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I go. Write to me very shortly.
And you shall understand from me her mind.

KING RICHARD III:
Bear her my true love's kiss; and so, farewell.
Relenting fool, and shallow, changing woman!
How now! what news?

RATCLIFF:
My gracious sovereign, on the western coast
Rideth a puissant navy; to the shore
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarm'd, and unresolved to beat them back:
'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;
And there they hull, expecting but the aid
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.

KING RICHARD III:
Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of Norfolk:
Ratcliff, thyself, or Catesby; where is he?

CATESBY:
Here, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Fly to the duke:
Post thou to Salisbury
When thou comest thither--
Dull, unmindful villain,
Why stand'st thou still, and go'st not to the duke?

CATESBY:
First, mighty sovereign, let me know your mind,
What from your grace I shall deliver to him.

KING RICHARD III:
O, true, good Catesby: bid him levy straight
The greatest strength and power he can make,
And meet me presently at Salisbury.

CATESBY:
I go.

RATCLIFF:
What is't your highness' pleasure I shall do at
Salisbury?

KING RICHARD III:
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?

RATCLIFF:
Your highness told me I should post before.

KING RICHARD III:
My mind is changed, sir, my mind is changed.
How now, what news with you?

STANLEY:
None good, my lord, to please you with the hearing;
Nor none so bad, but it may well be told.

KING RICHARD III:
Hoyday, a riddle! neither good nor bad!
Why dost thou run so many mile about,
When thou mayst tell thy tale a nearer way?
Once more, what news?

STANLEY:
Richmond is on the seas.

KING RICHARD III:
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!
White-liver'd runagate, what doth he there?

STANLEY:
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, sir, as you guess, as you guess?

STANLEY:
Stirr'd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Ely,
He makes for England, there to claim the crown.

KING RICHARD III:
Is the chair empty? is the sword unsway'd?
Is the king dead? the empire unpossess'd?
What heir of York is there alive but we?
And who is England's king but great York's heir?
Then, tell me, what doth he upon the sea?

STANLEY:
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.

KING RICHARD III:
Unless for that he comes to be your liege,
You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt, and fly to him, I fear.

STANLEY:
No, mighty liege; therefore mistrust me not.

KING RICHARD III:
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?
Where are thy tenants and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the western shore.
Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships!

STANLEY:
No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.

KING RICHARD III:
Cold friends to Richard: what do they in the north,
When they should serve their sovereign in the west?

STANLEY:
They have not been commanded, mighty sovereign:
Please it your majesty to give me leave,
I'll muster up my friends, and meet your grace
Where and what time your majesty shall please.

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, ay. thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond:
I will not trust you, sir.

STANLEY:
Most mighty sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful:
I never was nor never will be false.

KING RICHARD III:
Well,
Go muster men; but, hear you, leave behind
Your son, George Stanley: look your faith be firm.
Or else his head's assurance is but frail.

STANLEY:
So deal with him as I prove true to you.

Messenger:
My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,
As I by friends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty prelate
Bishop of Exeter, his brother there,
With many more confederates, are in arms.

Second Messenger:
My liege, in Kent the Guildfords are in arms;
And every hour more competitors
Flock to their aid, and still their power increaseth.

Third Messenger:
My lord, the army of the Duke of Buckingham--

KING RICHARD III:
Out on you, owls! nothing but songs of death?
Take that, until thou bring me better news.

Third Messenger:
The news I have to tell your majesty
Is, that by sudden floods and fall of waters,
Buckingham's army is dispersed and scatter'd;
And he himself wander'd away alone,
No man knows whither.

KING RICHARD III:
I cry thee mercy:
There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
Hath any well-advised friend proclaim'd
Reward to him that brings the traitor in?

Third Messenger:
Such proclamation hath been made, my liege.

Fourth Messenger:
Sir Thomas Lovel and Lord Marquis Dorset,
'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.
Yet this good comfort bring I to your grace,
The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest:
Richmond, in Yorkshire, sent out a boat
Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks
If they were his assistants, yea or no;
Who answer'd him, they came from Buckingham.
Upon his party: he, mistrusting them,
Hoisted sail and made away for Brittany.

KING RICHARD III:
March on, march on, since we are up in arms;
If not to fight with foreign enemies,
Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.

CATESBY:
My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken;
That is the best news: that the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford,
Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.

KING RICHARD III:
Away towards Salisbury! while we reason here,
A royal battle might be won and lost
Some one take order Buckingham be brought
To Salisbury; the rest march on with me.

DERBY:
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
That in the sty of this most bloody boar
My son George Stanley is frank'd up in hold:
If I revolt, off goes young George's head;
The fear of that withholds my present aid.
But, tell me, where is princely Richmond now?

CHRISTOPHER:
At Pembroke, or at Harford-west, in Wales.

DERBY:
What men of name resort to him?

CHRISTOPHER:
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier;
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley;
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas with a valiant crew;
And many more of noble fame and worth:
And towards London they do bend their course,
If by the way they be not fought withal.

DERBY:
Return unto thy lord; commend me to him:
Tell him the queen hath heartily consented
He shall espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
These letters will resolve him of my mind. Farewell.

BUCKINGHAM:
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?

Sheriff:
No, my good lord; therefore be patient.

BUCKINGHAM:
Hastings, and Edward's children, Rivers, Grey,
Holy King Henry, and thy fair son Edward,
Vaughan, and all that have miscarried
By underhand corrupted foul injustice,
If that your moody discontented souls
Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
Even for revenge mock my destruction!
This is All-Souls' day, fellows, is it not?

Sheriff:
It is, my lord.

BUCKINGHAM:
Why, then All-Souls' day is my body's doomsday.
This is the day that, in King Edward's time,
I wish't might fall on me, when I was found
False to his children or his wife's allies
This is the day wherein I wish'd to fall
By the false faith of him I trusted most;
This, this All-Souls' day to my fearful soul
Is the determined respite of my wrongs:
That high All-Seer that I dallied with
Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head
And given in earnest what I begg'd in jest.
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men
To turn their own points on their masters' bosoms:
Now Margaret's curse is fallen upon my head;
'When he,' quoth she, 'shall split thy heart with sorrow,
Remember Margaret was a prophetess.'
Come, sirs, convey me to the block of shame;
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.

RICHMOND:
Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the land
Have we march'd on without impediment;
And here receive we from our father Stanley
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
That spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines,
Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough
In your embowell'd bosoms, this foul swine
Lies now even in the centre of this isle,
Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn
From Tamworth thither is but one day's march.
In God's name, cheerly on, courageous friends,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
By this one bloody trial of sharp war.

OXFORD:
Every man's conscience is a thousand swords,
To fight against that bloody homicide.

HERBERT:
I doubt not but his friends will fly to us.

BLUNT:
He hath no friends but who are friends for fear.
Which in his greatest need will shrink from him.

RICHMOND:
All for our vantage. Then, in God's name, march:
True hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings:
Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.

KING RICHARD III:
Here pitch our tents, even here in Bosworth field.
My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?

SURREY:
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.

KING RICHARD III:
My Lord of Norfolk,--

NORFOLK:
Here, most gracious liege.

KING RICHARD III:
Norfolk, we must have knocks; ha! must we not?

NORFOLK:
We must both give and take, my gracious lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Up with my tent there! here will I lie tonight;
But where to-morrow?  Well, all's one for that.
Who hath descried the number of the foe?

NORFOLK:
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.

KING RICHARD III:
Why, our battalion trebles that account:
Besides, the king's name is a tower of strength,
Which they upon the adverse party want.
Up with my tent there! Valiant gentlemen,
Let us survey the vantage of the field
Call for some men of sound direction
Let's want no discipline, make no delay,
For, lords, to-morrow is a busy day.

RICHMOND:
The weary sun hath made a golden set,
And by the bright track of his fiery car,
Gives signal, of a goodly day to-morrow.
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.
Give me some ink and paper in my tent
I'll draw the form and model of our battle,
Limit each leader to his several charge,
And part in just proportion our small strength.
My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon,
And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment:
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good night to him
And by the second hour in the morning
Desire the earl to see me in my tent:
Yet one thing more, good Blunt, before thou go'st,
Where is Lord Stanley quarter'd, dost thou know?

BLUNT:
Unless I have mista'en his colours much,
Which well I am assured I have not done,
His regiment lies half a mile at least
South from the mighty power of the king.

RICHMOND:
If without peril it be possible,
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good-night to him,
And give him from me this most needful scroll.

BLUNT:
Upon my life, my lord, I'll under-take it;
And so, God give you quiet rest to-night!

RICHMOND:
Good night, good Captain Blunt. Come gentlemen,
Let us consult upon to-morrow's business
In to our tent; the air is raw and cold.

KING RICHARD III:
What is't o'clock?

CATESBY:
It's supper-time, my lord;
It's nine o'clock.

KING RICHARD III:
I will not sup to-night.
Give me some ink and paper.
What, is my beaver easier than it was?
And all my armour laid into my tent?

CATESBY:
If is, my liege; and all things are in readiness.

KING RICHARD III:
Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge;
Use careful watch, choose trusty sentinels.

NORFOLK:
I go, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Stir with the lark to-morrow, gentle Norfolk.

NORFOLK:
I warrant you, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Catesby!

CATESBY:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Send out a pursuivant at arms
To Stanley's regiment; bid him bring his power
Before sunrising, lest his son George fall
Into the blind cave of eternal night.
Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.
Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.
Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.
Ratcliff!

RATCLIFF:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Saw'st thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?

RATCLIFF:
Thomas the Earl of Surrey, and himself,
Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop
Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.

KING RICHARD III:
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine:
I have not that alacrity of spirit,
Nor cheer of mind, that I was wont to have.
Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?

RATCLIFF:
It is, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Bid my guard watch; leave me.
Ratcliff, about the mid of night come to my tent
And help to arm me. Leave me, I say.

DERBY:
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!

RICHMOND:
All comfort that the dark night can afford
Be to thy person, noble father-in-law!
Tell me, how fares our loving mother?

DERBY:
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother
Who prays continually for Richmond's good:
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
In brief,--for so the season bids us be,--
Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
I, as I may--that which I would I cannot,--
With best advantage will deceive the time,
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms:
But on thy side I may not be too forward
Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
Be executed in his father's sight.
Farewell: the leisure and the fearful time
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
And ample interchange of sweet discourse,
Which so long sunder'd friends should dwell upon:
God give us leisure for these rites of love!
Once more, adieu: be valiant, and speed well!

RICHMOND:
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment:
I'll strive, with troubled thoughts, to take a nap,
Lest leaden slumber peise me down to-morrow,
When I should mount with wings of victory:
Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
O Thou, whose captain I account myself,
Look on my forces with a gracious eye;
Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy fall
The usurping helmets of our adversaries!
Make us thy ministers of chastisement,
That we may praise thee in the victory!
To thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes:
Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!

Ghost of Prince Edward:

Ghost of King Henry VI:

Ghost of CLARENCE:

Ghost of RIVERS:

Ghost of GREY:

Ghost of VAUGHAN:

All:

Ghost of HASTINGS:

Ghosts of young Princes:

Ghost of LADY ANNE:

Ghost of BUCKINGHAM:

KING RICHARD III:
Give me another horse: bind up my wounds.
Have mercy, Jesu!--Soft! I did but dream.
O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!
The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight.
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
What do I fear?  myself?  there's none else by:
Richard loves Richard; that is, I am I.
Is there a murderer here?  No. Yes, I am:
Then fly. What, from myself?   Great reason why:
Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself?
Alack. I love myself. Wherefore?  for any good
That I myself have done unto myself?
O, no! alas, I rather hate myself
For hateful deeds committed by myself!
I am a villain: yet I lie. I am not.
Fool, of thyself speak well: fool, do not flatter.
My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain.
Perjury, perjury, in the high'st degree
Murder, stem murder, in the direst degree;
All several sins, all used in each degree,
Throng to the bar, crying all, Guilty! guilty!
I shall despair. There is no creature loves me;
And if I die, no soul shall pity me:
Nay, wherefore should they, since that I myself
Find in myself no pity to myself?
Methought the souls of all that I had murder'd
Came to my tent; and every one did threat
To-morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard.

RATCLIFF:
My lord!

KING RICHARD III:
'Zounds! who is there?

RATCLIFF:
Ratcliff, my lord; 'tis I. The early village-cock
Hath twice done salutation to the morn;
Your friends are up, and buckle on their armour.

KING RICHARD III:
O Ratcliff, I have dream'd a fearful dream!
What thinkest thou, will our friends prove all true?

RATCLIFF:
No doubt, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
O Ratcliff, I fear, I fear,--

RATCLIFF:
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.

KING RICHARD III:
By the apostle Paul, shadows to-night
Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Armed in proof, and led by shallow Richmond.
It is not yet near day. Come, go with me;
Under our tents I'll play the eaves-dropper,
To see if any mean to shrink from me.

LORDS:
Good morrow, Richmond!

RICHMOND:
Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,
That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.

LORDS:
How have you slept, my lord?

RICHMOND:
The sweetest sleep, and fairest-boding dreams
That ever enter'd in a drowsy head,
Have I since your departure had, my lords.
Methought their souls, whose bodies Richard murder'd,
Came to my tent, and cried on victory:
I promise you, my soul is very jocund
In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
How far into the morning is it, lords?

LORDS:
Upon the stroke of four.

RICHMOND:
Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction.
More than I have said, loving countrymen,
The leisure and enforcement of the time
Forbids to dwell upon: yet remember this,
God and our good cause fight upon our side;
The prayers of holy saints and wronged souls,
Like high-rear'd bulwarks, stand before our faces;
Richard except, those whom we fight against
Had rather have us win than him they follow:
For what is he they follow?  truly, gentlemen,
A bloody tyrant and a homicide;
One raised in blood, and one in blood establish'd;
One that made means to come by what he hath,
And slaughter'd those that were the means to help him;
Abase foul stone, made precious by the foil
Of England's chair, where he is falsely set;
One that hath ever been God's enemy:
Then, if you fight against God's enemy,
God will in justice ward you as his soldiers;
If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain;
If you do fight against your country's foes,
Your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire;
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors;
If you do free your children from the sword,
Your children's children quit it in your age.
Then, in the name of God and all these rights,
Advance your standards, draw your willing swords.
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face;
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
The least of you shall share his part thereof.
Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully;
God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!

KING RICHARD III:
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?

RATCLIFF:
That he was never trained up in arms.

KING RICHARD III:
He said the truth: and what said Surrey then?

RATCLIFF:
He smiled and said 'The better for our purpose.'

KING RICHARD III:
He was in the right; and so indeed it is.
Ten the clock there. Give me a calendar.
Who saw the sun to-day?

RATCLIFF:
Not I, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Then he disdains to shine; for by the book
He should have braved the east an hour ago
A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliff!

RATCLIFF:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
The sun will not be seen to-day;
The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.
I would these dewy tears were from the ground.
Not shine to-day! Why, what is that to me
More than to Richmond?  for the selfsame heaven
That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.

NORFOLK:
Arm, arm, my lord; the foe vaunts in the field.

KING RICHARD III:
Come, bustle, bustle; caparison my horse.
Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power:
I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,
And thus my battle shall be ordered:
My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,
Consisting equally of horse and foot;
Our archers shall be placed in the midst
John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.
They thus directed, we will follow
In the main battle, whose puissance on either side
Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.
This, and Saint George to boot! What think'st thou, Norfolk?

NORFOLK:
A good direction, warlike sovereign.
This found I on my tent this morning.

KING RICHARD III:

Messenger:
My lord, he doth deny to come.

KING RICHARD III:
Off with his son George's head!

NORFOLK:
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh
After the battle let George Stanley die.

KING RICHARD III:
A thousand hearts are great within my bosom:
Advance our standards, set upon our foes
Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,
Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!
Upon them! victory sits on our helms.

CATESBY:
Rescue, my Lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
The king enacts more wonders than a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger:
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.
Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!

KING RICHARD III:
A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!

CATESBY:
Withdraw, my lord; I'll help you to a horse.

KING RICHARD III:
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the die:
I think there be six Richmonds in the field;
Five have I slain to-day instead of him.
A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!

RICHMOND:
God and your arms be praised, victorious friends,
The day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.

DERBY:
Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.
Lo, here, this long-usurped royalty
From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
Have I pluck'd off, to grace thy brows withal:
Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.

RICHMOND:
Great God of heaven, say Amen to all!
But, tell me, is young George Stanley living?

DERBY:
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town;
Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.

RICHMOND:
What men of name are slain on either side?

DERBY:
John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers,
Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.

RICHMOND:
Inter their bodies as becomes their births:
Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
That in submission will return to us:
And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,
We will unite the white rose and the red:
Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,
That long have frown'd upon their enmity!
What traitor hears me, and says not amen?
England hath long been mad, and scarr'd herself;
The brother blindly shed the brother's blood,
The father rashly slaughter'd his own son,
The son, compell'd, been butcher to the sire:
All this divided York and Lancaster,
Divided in their dire division,
O, now, let Richmond and Elizabeth,
The true succeeders of each royal house,
By God's fair ordinance conjoin together!
And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so.
Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace,
With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days!
Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,
That would reduce these bloody days again,
And make poor England weep in streams of blood!
Let them not live to taste this land's increase
That would with treason wound this fair land's peace!
Now civil wounds are stopp'd, peace lives again:
That she may long live here, God say amen!

KING RICHARD II:
Old John of Gaunt, time-honour'd Lancaster,
Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
Brought hither Henry Hereford thy bold son,
Here to make good the boisterous late appeal,
Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
I have, my liege.

KING RICHARD II:
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him,
If he appeal the duke on ancient malice;
Or worthily, as a good subject should,
On some known ground of treachery in him?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
As near as I could sift him on that argument,
On some apparent danger seen in him
Aim'd at your highness, no inveterate malice.

KING RICHARD II:
Then call them to our presence; face to face,
And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear
The accuser and the accused freely speak:
High-stomach'd are they both, and full of ire,
In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Many years of happy days befal
My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Each day still better other's happiness;
Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
Add an immortal title to your crown!

KING RICHARD II:
We thank you both: yet one but flatters us,
As well appeareth by the cause you come;
Namely to appeal each other of high treason.
Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
First, heaven be the record to my speech!
In the devotion of a subject's love,
Tendering the precious safety of my prince,
And free from other misbegotten hate,
Come I appellant to this princely presence.
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
And mark my greeting well; for what I speak
My body shall make good upon this earth,
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
Too good to be so and too bad to live,
Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat;
And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,
What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal:
'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,
The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;
The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this:
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
As to be hush'd and nought at all to say:
First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me
From giving reins and spurs to my free speech;
Which else would post until it had return'd
These terms of treason doubled down his throat.
Setting aside his high blood's royalty,
And let him be no kinsman to my liege,
I do defy him, and I spit at him;
Call him a slanderous coward and a villain:
Which to maintain I would allow him odds,
And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
Or any other ground inhabitable,
Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.
Mean time let this defend my loyalty,
By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
Disclaiming here the kindred of the king,
And lay aside my high blood's royalty,
Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop:
By that and all the rites of knighthood else,
Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
I take it up; and by that sword I swear
Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,
I'll answer thee in any fair degree,
Or chivalrous design of knightly trial:
And when I mount, alive may I not light,
If I be traitor or unjustly fight!

KING RICHARD II:
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
It must be great that can inherit us
So much as of a thought of ill in him.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true;
That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles
In name of lendings for your highness' soldiers,
The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments,
Like a false traitor and injurious villain.
Besides I say and will in battle prove,
Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge
That ever was survey'd by English eye,
That all the treasons for these eighteen years
Complotted and contrived in this land
Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
Further I say and further will maintain
Upon his bad life to make all this good,
That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,
Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
And consequently, like a traitor coward,
Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood:
Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries,
Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,
To me for justice and rough chastisement;
And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.

KING RICHARD II:
How high a pitch his resolution soars!
Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
O, let my sovereign turn away his face
And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his blood,
How God and good men hate so foul a liar.

KING RICHARD II:
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears:
Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
As he is but my father's brother's son,
Now, by my sceptre's awe, I make a vow,
Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood
Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize
The unstooping firmness of my upright soul:
He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou:
Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,
Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais
Disbursed I duly to his highness' soldiers;
The other part reserved I by consent,
For that my sovereign liege was in my debt
Upon remainder of a dear account,
Since last I went to France to fetch his queen:
Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death,
I slew him not; but to my own disgrace
Neglected my sworn duty in that case.
For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,
The honourable father to my foe
Once did I lay an ambush for your life,
A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul
But ere I last received the sacrament
I did confess it, and exactly begg'd
Your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it.
This is my fault: as for the rest appeall'd,
It issues from the rancour of a villain,
A recreant and most degenerate traitor
Which in myself I boldly will defend;
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this overweening traitor's foot,
To prove myself a loyal gentleman
Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.
In haste whereof, most heartily I pray
Your highness to assign our trial day.

KING RICHARD II:
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me;
Let's purge this choler without letting blood:
This we prescribe, though no physician;
Deep malice makes too deep incision;
Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed;
Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
Good uncle, let this end where it begun;
We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
To be a make-peace shall become my age:
Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.

KING RICHARD II:
And, Norfolk, throw down his.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
When, Harry, when?
Obedience bids I should not bid again.

KING RICHARD II:
Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:
The one my duty owes; but my fair name,
Despite of death that lives upon my grave,
To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.
I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here,
Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear,
The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood
Which breathed this poison.

KING RICHARD II:
Rage must be withstood:
Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame.
And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,
The purest treasure mortal times afford
Is spotless reputation: that away,
Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest
Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
Mine honour is my life; both grow in one:
Take honour from me, and my life is done:
Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;
In that I live and for that will I die.

KING RICHARD II:
Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!
Shall I seem crest-fall'n in my father's sight?
Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height
Before this out-dared dastard? Ere my tongue
Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong,
Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear
The slavish motive of recanting fear,
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face.

KING RICHARD II:
We were not born to sue, but to command;
Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day:
There shall your swords and lances arbitrate
The swelling difference of your settled hate:
Since we can not atone you, we shall see
Justice design the victor's chivalry.
Lord marshal, command our officers at arms
Be ready to direct these home alarms.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
Doth more solicit me than your exclaims,
To stir against the butchers of his life!
But since correction lieth in those hands
Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven;
Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,
Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.

DUCHESS:
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,
Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,
Or seven fair branches springing from one root:
Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;
But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,
One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt,
Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded,
By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.
Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb,
That metal, that self-mould, that fashion'd thee
Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,
Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent
In some large measure to thy father's death,
In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
Who was the model of thy father's life.
Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair:
In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd,
Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee:
That which in mean men we intitle patience
Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.
What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life,
The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,
His deputy anointed in His sight,
Hath caused his death: the which if wrongfully,
Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift
An angry arm against His minister.

DUCHESS:
Where then, alas, may I complain myself?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
To God, the widow's champion and defence.

DUCHESS:
Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.
Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold
Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight:
O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear,
That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!
Or, if misfortune miss the first career,
Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom,
They may break his foaming courser's back,
And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!
Farewell, old Gaunt: thy sometimes brother's wife
With her companion grief must end her life.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry:
As much good stay with thee as go with me!

DUCHESS:
Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls,
Not with the empty hollowness, but weight:
I take my leave before I have begun,
For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
Lo, this is all:--nay, yet depart not so;
Though this be all, do not so quickly go;
I shall remember more. Bid him--ah, what?--
With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
Alack, and what shall good old York there see
But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls,
Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
Therefore commend me; let him not come there,
To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.
Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die:
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.

Lord Marshal:
My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm'd?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.

Lord Marshal:
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stay
For nothing but his majesty's approach.

KING RICHARD II:
Marshal, demand of yonder champion
The cause of his arrival here in arms:
Ask him his name and orderly proceed
To swear him in the justice of his cause.

Lord Marshal:
In God's name and the king's, say who thou art
And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,
Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel:
Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath;
As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk;
Who hither come engaged by my oath--
Which God defend a knight should violate!--
Both to defend my loyalty and truth
To God, my king and my succeeding issue,
Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me
And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,
To prove him, in defending of myself,
A traitor to my God, my king, and me:
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

KING RICHARD II:
Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,
Both who he is and why he cometh hither
Thus plated in habiliments of war,
And formally, according to our law,
Depose him in the justice of his cause.

Lord Marshal:
What is thy name? and wherefore comest thou hither,
Before King Richard in his royal lists?
Against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel?
Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby
Am I; who ready here do stand in arms,
To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour,
In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,
To God of heaven, King Richard and to me;
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

Lord Marshal:
On pain of death, no person be so bold
Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
Except the marshal and such officers
Appointed to direct these fair designs.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand,
And bow my knee before his majesty:
For Mowbray and myself are like two men
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage;
Then let us take a ceremonious leave
And loving farewell of our several friends.

Lord Marshal:
The appellant in all duty greets your highness,
And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.

KING RICHARD II:
We will descend and fold him in our arms.
Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,
So be thy fortune in this royal fight!
Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed,
Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O let no noble eye profane a tear
For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear:
As confident as is the falcon's flight
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving lord, I take my leave of you;
Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet:
O thou, the earthly author of my blood,
Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up
To reach at victory above my head,
Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers;
And with thy blessings steel my lance's point,
That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat,
And furbish new the name of John a Gaunt,
Even in the lusty havior of his son.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!
Be swift like lightning in the execution;
And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
Of thy adverse pernicious enemy:
Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
However God or fortune cast my lot,
There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,
A loyal, just and upright gentleman:
Never did captive with a freer heart
Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace
His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement,
More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
This feast of battle with mine adversary.
Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,
Take from my mouth the wish of happy years:
As gentle and as jocund as to jest
Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.

KING RICHARD II:
Farewell, my lord: securely I espy
Virtue with valour couched in thine eye.
Order the trial, marshal, and begin.

Lord Marshal:
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.

Lord Marshal:
Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.

First Herald:
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
A traitor to his God, his king and him;
And dares him to set forward to the fight.

Second Herald:
Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Both to defend himself and to approve
Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal;
Courageously and with a free desire
Attending but the signal to begin.

Lord Marshal:
Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants.
Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.

KING RICHARD II:
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
And both return back to their chairs again:
Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound
While we return these dukes what we decree.
Draw near,
And list what with our council we have done.
For that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd
With that dear blood which it hath fostered;
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword;
And for we think the eagle-winged pride
Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
With rival-hating envy, set on you
To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle
Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep;
Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums,
With harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray,
And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,
Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace
And make us wade even in our kindred's blood,
Therefore, we banish you our territories:
You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields
Shall not regreet our fair dominions,
But tread the stranger paths of banishment.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Your will be done: this must my comfort be,
Sun that warms you here shall shine on me;
And those his golden beams to you here lent
Shall point on me and gild my banishment.

KING RICHARD II:
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:
The sly slow hours shall not determinate
The dateless limit of thy dear exile;
The hopeless word of 'never to return'
Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,
And all unlook'd for from your highness' mouth:
A dearer merit, not so deep a maim
As to be cast forth in the common air,
Have I deserved at your highness' hands.
The language I have learn'd these forty years,
My native English, now I must forego:
And now my tongue's use is to me no more
Than an unstringed viol or a harp,
Or like a cunning instrument cased up,
Or, being open, put into his hands
That knows no touch to tune the harmony:
Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,
Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips;
And dull unfeeling barren ignorance
Is made my gaoler to attend on me.
I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,
Too far in years to be a pupil now:
What is thy sentence then but speechless death,
Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?

KING RICHARD II:
It boots thee not to be compassionate:
After our sentence plaining comes too late.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Then thus I turn me from my country's light,
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

KING RICHARD II:
Return again, and take an oath with thee.
Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands;
Swear by the duty that you owe to God--
Our part therein we banish with yourselves--
To keep the oath that we administer:
You never shall, so help you truth and God!
Embrace each other's love in banishment;
Nor never look upon each other's face;
Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;
Nor never by advised purpose meet
To plot, contrive, or complot any ill
'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I swear.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
And I, to keep all this.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:--
By this time, had the king permitted us,
One of our souls had wander'd in the air.
Banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh,
As now our flesh is banish'd from this land:
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm;
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
The clogging burthen of a guilty soul.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor,
My name be blotted from the book of life,
And I from heaven banish'd as from hence!
But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know;
And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue.
Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;
Save back to England, all the world's my way.

KING RICHARD II:
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect
Hath from the number of his banish'd years
Pluck'd four away.
Six frozen winter spent,
Return with welcome home from banishment.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
How long a time lies in one little word!
Four lagging winters and four wanton springs
End in a word: such is the breath of kings.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
I thank my liege, that in regard of me
He shortens four years of my son's exile:
But little vantage shall I reap thereby;
For, ere the six years that he hath to spend
Can change their moons and bring their times about
My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light
Shall be extinct with age and endless night;
My inch of taper will be burnt and done,
And blindfold death not let me see my son.

KING RICHARD II:
Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
But not a minute, king, that thou canst give:
Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;
Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;
Thy word is current with him for my death,
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.

KING RICHARD II:
Thy son is banish'd upon good advice,
Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave:
Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
You urged me as a judge; but I had rather
You would have bid me argue like a father.
O, had it been a stranger, not my child,
To smooth his fault I should have been more mild:
A partial slander sought I to avoid,
And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.
Alas, I look'd when some of you should say,
I was too strict to make mine own away;
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue
Against my will to do myself this wrong.

KING RICHARD II:
Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so:
Six years we banish him, and he shall go.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Cousin, farewell: what presence must not know,
From where you do remain let paper show.

Lord Marshal:
My lord, no leave take I; for I will ride,
As far as land will let me, by your side.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,
That thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I have too few to take my leave of you,
When the tongue's office should be prodigal
To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
What is six winters? they are quickly gone.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
The sullen passage of thy weary steps
Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set
The precious jewel of thy home return.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make
Will but remember me what a deal of world
I wander from the jewels that I love.
Must I not serve a long apprenticehood
To foreign passages, and in the end,
Having my freedom, boast of nothing else
But that I was a journeyman to grief?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
All places that the eye of heaven visits
Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
Teach thy necessity to reason thus;
There is no virtue like necessity.
Think not the king did banish thee,
But thou the king. Woe doth the heavier sit,
Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour
And not the king exiled thee; or suppose
Devouring pestilence hangs in our air
And thou art flying to a fresher clime:
Look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
To lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest:
Suppose the singing birds musicians,
The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd,
The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more
Than a delightful measure or a dance;
For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite
The man that mocks at it and sets it light.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O, who can hold a fire in his hand
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
By bare imagination of a feast?
Or wallow naked in December snow
By thinking on fantastic summer's heat?
O, no! the apprehension of the good
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse:
Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way:
Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu;
My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!
Where'er I wander, boast of this I can,
Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman.

KING RICHARD II:
We did observe. Cousin Aumerle,
How far brought you high Hereford on his way?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
But to the next highway, and there I left him.

KING RICHARD II:
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind,
Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.

KING RICHARD II:
What said our cousin when you parted with him?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
'Farewell:'
And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
To counterfeit oppression of such grief
That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.
Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours
And added years to his short banishment,
He should have had a volume of farewells;
But since it would not, he had none of me.

KING RICHARD II:
He is our cousin, cousin; but 'tis doubt,
When time shall call him home from banishment,
Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green
Observed his courtship to the common people;
How he did seem to dive into their hearts
With humble and familiar courtesy,
What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles
And patient underbearing of his fortune,
As 'twere to banish their affects with him.
Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;
A brace of draymen bid God speed him well
And had the tribute of his supple knee,
With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;'
As were our England in reversion his,
And he our subjects' next degree in hope.

GREEN:
Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts.
Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
Expedient manage must be made, my liege,
Ere further leisure yield them further means
For their advantage and your highness' loss.

KING RICHARD II:
We will ourself in person to this war:
And, for our coffers, with too great a court
And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,
We are inforced to farm our royal realm;
The revenue whereof shall furnish us
For our affairs in hand: if that come short,
Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters;
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold
And send them after to supply our wants;
For we will make for Ireland presently.
Bushy, what news?

BUSHY:
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
Suddenly taken; and hath sent post haste
To entreat your majesty to visit him.

KING RICHARD II:
Where lies he?

BUSHY:
At Ely House.

KING RICHARD II:
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind
To help him to his grave immediately!
The lining of his coffers shall make coats
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him:
Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!

All:
Amen.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Will the king come, that I may breathe my last
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?

DUKE OF YORK:
Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, but they say the tongues of dying men
Enforce attention like deep harmony:
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,
For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.
He that no more must say is listen'd more
Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose;
More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before:
The setting sun, and music at the close,
As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
Writ in remembrance more than things long past:
Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,
My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.

DUKE OF YORK:
No; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds,
As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,
Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound
The open ear of youth doth always listen;
Report of fashions in proud Italy,
Whose manners still our tardy apish nation
Limps after in base imitation.
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity--
So it be new, there's no respect how vile--
That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?
Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,
Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.
Direct not him whose way himself will choose:
'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired
And thus expiring do foretell of him:
His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,
For violent fires soon burn out themselves;
Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;
With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder:
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.
This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle,
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, demi-paradise,
This fortress built by Nature for herself
Against infection and the hand of war,
This happy breed of men, this little world,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a moat defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier lands,
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
Fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth,
Renowned for their deeds as far from home,
For Christian service and true chivalry,
As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry,
Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son,
This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,
Dear for her reputation through the world,
Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it,
Like to a tenement or pelting farm:
England, bound in with the triumphant sea
Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds:
That England, that was wont to conquer others,
Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
How happy then were my ensuing death!

DUKE OF YORK:
The king is come: deal mildly with his youth;
For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.

QUEEN:
How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?

KING RICHARD II:
What comfort, man? how is't with aged Gaunt?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O how that name befits my composition!
Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old:
Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;
And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
For sleeping England long time have I watch'd;
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt:
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon,
Is my strict fast; I mean, my children's looks;
And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt:
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.

KING RICHARD II:
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
No, misery makes sport to mock itself:
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,
I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.

KING RICHARD II:
Should dying men flatter with those that live?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
No, no, men living flatter those that die.

KING RICHARD II:
Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.

KING RICHARD II:
I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;
Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.
Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land
Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;
And thou, too careless patient as thou art,
Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure
Of those physicians that first wounded thee:
A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,
Whose compass is no bigger than thy head;
And yet, incaged in so small a verge,
The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye
Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,
Which art possess'd now to depose thyself.
Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
It were a shame to let this land by lease;
But for thy world enjoying but this land,
Is it not more than shame to shame it so?
Landlord of England art thou now, not king:
Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; And thou--

KING RICHARD II:
A lunatic lean-witted fool,
Presuming on an ague's privilege,
Darest with thy frozen admonition
Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
With fury from his native residence.
Now, by my seat's right royal majesty,
Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, spare me not, my brother Edward's son,
For that I was his father Edward's son;
That blood already, like the pelican,
Hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused:
My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul,
Whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls!
May be a precedent and witness good
That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood:
Join with the present sickness that I have;
And thy unkindness be like crooked age,
To crop at once a too long wither'd flower.
Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
These words hereafter thy tormentors be!
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave:
Love they to live that love and honour have.

KING RICHARD II:
And let them die that age and sullens have;
For both hast thou, and both become the grave.

DUKE OF YORK:
I do beseech your majesty, impute his words
To wayward sickliness and age in him:
He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear
As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.

KING RICHARD II:
Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;
As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.

KING RICHARD II:
What says he?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Nay, nothing; all is said
His tongue is now a stringless instrument;
Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.

DUKE OF YORK:
Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.

KING RICHARD II:
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he;
His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars:
We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,
Which live like venom where no venom else
But only they have privilege to live.
And for these great affairs do ask some charge,
Towards our assistance we do seize to us
The plate, corn, revenues and moveables,
Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.

DUKE OF YORK:
How long shall I be patient? ah, how long
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment
Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,
Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,
Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.
I am the last of noble Edward's sons,
Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first:
In war was never lion raged more fierce,
In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
Than was that young and princely gentleman.
His face thou hast, for even so look'd he,
Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours;
But when he frown'd, it was against the French
And not against his friends; his noble hand
Did will what he did spend and spent not that
Which his triumphant father's hand had won;
His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,
But bloody with the enemies of his kin.
O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,
Or else he never would compare between.

KING RICHARD II:
Why, uncle, what's the matter?

DUKE OF YORK:
O my liege,
Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased
Not to be pardon'd, am content withal.
Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford?
Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live?
Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true?
Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
Is not his heir a well-deserving son?
Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time
His charters and his customary rights;
Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;
Be not thyself; for how art thou a king
But by fair sequence and succession?
Now, afore God--God forbid I say true!--
If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,
Call in the letters patent that he hath
By his attorneys-general to sue
His livery, and deny his offer'd homage,
You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts
And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts
Which honour and allegiance cannot think.

KING RICHARD II:
Think what you will, we seize into our hands
His plate, his goods, his money and his lands.

DUKE OF YORK:
I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell:
What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell;
But by bad courses may be understood
That their events can never fall out good.

KING RICHARD II:
Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight:
Bid him repair to us to Ely House
To see this business. To-morrow next
We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow:
And we create, in absence of ourself,
Our uncle York lord governor of England;
For he is just and always loved us well.
Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part;
Be merry, for our time of stay is short

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.

LORD ROSS:
And living too; for now his son is duke.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Barely in title, not in revenue.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Richly in both, if justice had her right.

LORD ROSS:
My heart is great; but it must break with silence,
Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak more
That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?
If it be so, out with it boldly, man;
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.

LORD ROSS:
No good at all that I can do for him;
Unless you call it good to pity him,
Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne
In him, a royal prince, and many moe
Of noble blood in this declining land.
The king is not himself, but basely led
By flatterers; and what they will inform,
Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all,
That will the king severely prosecute
'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.

LORD ROSS:
The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes,
And quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined
For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
And daily new exactions are devised,
As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what:
But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not,
But basely yielded upon compromise
That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows:
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.

LORD ROSS:
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.

LORD ROSS:
He hath not money for these Irish wars,
His burthenous taxations notwithstanding,
But by the robbing of the banish'd duke.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
His noble kinsman: most degenerate king!
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm;
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
And yet we strike not, but securely perish.

LORD ROSS:
We see the very wreck that we must suffer;
And unavoided is the danger now,
For suffering so the causes of our wreck.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death
I spy life peering; but I dare not say
How near the tidings of our comfort is.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.

LORD ROSS:
Be confident to speak, Northumberland:
We three are but thyself; and, speaking so,
Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay
In Brittany, received intelligence
That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham,
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,
Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,
Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint,
All these well furnish'd by the Duke of Bretagne
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,
Are making hither with all due expedience
And shortly mean to touch our northern shore:
Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
The first departing of the king for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
Imp out our drooping country's broken wing,
Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,
Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt
And make high majesty look like itself,
Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh;
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
Stay and be secret, and myself will go.

LORD ROSS:
To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.

BUSHY:
Madam, your majesty is too much sad:
You promised, when you parted with the king,
To lay aside life-harming heaviness
And entertain a cheerful disposition.

QUEEN:
To please the king I did; to please myself
I cannot do it; yet I know no cause
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
As my sweet Richard: yet again, methinks,
Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb,
Is coming towards me, and my inward soul
With nothing trembles: at some thing it grieves,
More than with parting from my lord the king.

BUSHY:
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,
Which shows like grief itself, but is not so;
For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,
Divides one thing entire to many objects;
Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon
Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry
Distinguish form: so your sweet majesty,
Looking awry upon your lord's departure,
Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail;
Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows
Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen,
More than your lord's departure weep not: more's not seen;
Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye,
Which for things true weeps things imaginary.

QUEEN:
It may be so; but yet my inward soul
Persuades me it is otherwise: howe'er it be,
I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad
As, though on thinking on no thought I think,
Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.

BUSHY:
'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.

QUEEN:
'Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived
From some forefather grief; mine is not so,
For nothing had begot my something grief;
Or something hath the nothing that I grieve:
'Tis in reversion that I do possess;
But what it is, that is not yet known; what
I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot.

GREEN:
God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen:
I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.

QUEEN:
Why hopest thou so? 'tis better hope he is;
For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:
Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?

GREEN:
That he, our hope, might have retired his power,
And driven into despair an enemy's hope,
Who strongly hath set footing in this land:
The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself,
And with uplifted arms is safe arrived
At Ravenspurgh.

QUEEN:
Now God in heaven forbid!

GREEN:
Ah, madam, 'tis too true: and that is worse,
The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy,
The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby,
With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.

BUSHY:
Why have you not proclaim'd Northumberland
And all the rest revolted faction traitors?

GREEN:
We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester
Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship,
And all the household servants fled with him
To Bolingbroke.

QUEEN:
So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,
And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir:
Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,
And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother,
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.

BUSHY:
Despair not, madam.

QUEEN:
Who shall hinder me?
I will despair, and be at enmity
With cozening hope: he is a flatterer,
A parasite, a keeper back of death,
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
Which false hope lingers in extremity.

GREEN:
Here comes the Duke of York.

QUEEN:
With signs of war about his aged neck:
O, full of careful business are his looks!
Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.

DUKE OF YORK:
Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts:
Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth,
Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.
Your husband, he is gone to save far off,
Whilst others come to make him lose at home:
Here am I left to underprop his land,
Who, weak with age, cannot support myself:
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;
Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.

Servant:
My lord, your son was gone before I came.

DUKE OF YORK:
He was? Why, so! go all which way it will!
The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold,
And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.
Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;
Bid her send me presently a thousand pound:
Hold, take my ring.

Servant:
My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,
To-day, as I came by, I called there;
But I shall grieve you to report the rest.

DUKE OF YORK:
What is't, knave?

Servant:
An hour before I came, the duchess died.

DUKE OF YORK:
God for his mercy! what a tide of woes
Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
I know not what to do: I would to God,
So my untruth had not provoked him to it,
The king had cut off my head with my brother's.
What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Come, sister,--cousin, I would say--pray, pardon me.
Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts
And bring away the armour that is there.
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
If I know how or which way to order these affairs
Thus thrust disorderly into my hands,
Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen:
The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath
And duty bids defend; the other again
Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd,
Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I'll
Dispose of you.
Gentlemen, go, muster up your men,
And meet me presently at Berkeley.
I should to Plashy too;
But time will not permit: all is uneven,
And every thing is left at six and seven.

BUSHY:
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
But none returns. For us to levy power
Proportionable to the enemy
Is all unpossible.

GREEN:
Besides, our nearness to the king in love
Is near the hate of those love not the king.

BAGOT:
And that's the wavering commons: for their love
Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.

BUSHY:
Wherein the king stands generally condemn'd.

BAGOT:
If judgement lie in them, then so do we,
Because we ever have been near the king.

GREEN:
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle:
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.

BUSHY:
Thither will I with you; for little office
The hateful commons will perform for us,
Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.
Will you go along with us?

BAGOT:
No; I will to Ireland to his majesty.
Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain,
We three here art that ne'er shall meet again.

BUSHY:
That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.

GREEN:
Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes
Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry:
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.

BUSHY:
Well, we may meet again.

BAGOT:
I fear me, never.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Believe me, noble lord,
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire:
These high wild hills and rough uneven ways
Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome,
And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
Making the hard way sweet and delectable.
But I bethink me what a weary way
From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found
In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled
The tediousness and process of my travel:
But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
The present benefit which I possess;
And hope to joy is little less in joy
Than hope enjoy'd: by this the weary lords
Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done
By sight of what I have, your noble company.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Of much less value is my company
Than your good words. But who comes here?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
It is my son, young Harry Percy,
Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.
Harry, how fares your uncle?

HENRY PERCY:
I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Why, is he not with the queen?

HENRY PERCY:
No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court,
Broken his staff of office and dispersed
The household of the king.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
What was his reason?
He was not so resolved when last we spake together.

HENRY PERCY:
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.
But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh,
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover
What power the Duke of York had levied there;
Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?

HENRY PERCY:
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot
Which ne'er I did remember: to my knowledge,
I never in my life did look on him.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.

HENRY PERCY:
My gracious lord, I tender you my service,
Such as it is, being tender, raw and young:
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
To more approved service and desert.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure
I count myself in nothing else so happy
As in a soul remembering my good friends;
And, as my fortune ripens with thy love,
It shall be still thy true love's recompense:
My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
How far is it to Berkeley? and what stir
Keeps good old York there with his men of war?

HENRY PERCY:
There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,
Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard;
And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour;
None else of name and noble estimate.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues
A banish'd traitor: all my treasury
Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd
Shall be your love and labour's recompense.

LORD ROSS:
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
And far surmounts our labour to attain it.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor;
Which, till my infant fortune comes to years,
Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.

LORD BERKELEY:
My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My lord, my answer is--to Lancaster;
And I am come to seek that name in England;
And I must find that title in your tongue,
Before I make reply to aught you say.

LORD BERKELEY:
Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning
To raze one title of your honour out:
To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,
From the most gracious regent of this land,
The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on
To take advantage of the absent time
And fright our native peace with self-born arms.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I shall not need transport my words by you;
Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle!

DUKE OF YORK:
Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,
Whose duty is deceiveable and false.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My gracious uncle--

DUKE OF YORK:
Tut, tut!
Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle:
I am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace.'
In an ungracious mouth is but profane.
Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs
Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?
But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march
So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,
Frighting her pale-faced villages with war
And ostentation of despised arms?
Comest thou because the anointed king is hence?
Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,
And in my loyal bosom lies his power.
Were I but now the lord of such hot youth
As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
From forth the ranks of many thousand French,
O, then how quickly should this arm of mine.
Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee
And minister correction to thy fault!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault:
On what condition stands it and wherein?

DUKE OF YORK:
Even in condition of the worst degree,
In gross rebellion and detested treason:
Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come
Before the expiration of thy time,
In braving arms against thy sovereign.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford;
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye:
You are my father, for methinks in you
I see old Gaunt alive; O, then, my father,
Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd
A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties
Pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away
To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born?
If that my cousin king be King of England,
It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin;
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father,
To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
I am denied to sue my livery here,
And yet my letters-patents give me leave:
My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold,
And these and all are all amiss employ'd.
What would you have me do? I am a subject,
And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me;
And therefore, personally I lay my claim
To my inheritance of free descent.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The noble duke hath been too much abused.

LORD ROSS:
It stands your grace upon to do him right.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Base men by his endowments are made great.

DUKE OF YORK:
My lords of England, let me tell you this:
I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs
And laboured all I could to do him right;
But in this kind to come, in braving arms,
Be his own carver and cut out his way,
To find out right with wrong, it may not be;
And you that do abet him in this kind
Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is
But for his own; and for the right of that
We all have strongly sworn to give him aid;
And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!

DUKE OF YORK:
Well, well, I see the issue of these arms:
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
Because my power is weak and all ill left:
But if I could, by Him that gave me life,
I would attach you all and make you stoop
Unto the sovereign mercy of the king;
But since I cannot, be it known to you
I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well;
Unless you please to enter in the castle
And there repose you for this night.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
An offer, uncle, that we will accept:
But we must win your grace to go with us
To Bristol castle, which they say is held
By Bushy, Bagot and their complices,
The caterpillars of the commonwealth,
Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.

DUKE OF YORK:
It may be I will go with you: but yet I'll pause;
For I am loath to break our country's laws.
Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are:
Things past redress are now with me past care.

Captain:
My lord of Salisbury, we have stay'd ten days,
And hardly kept our countrymen together,
And yet we hear no tidings from the king;
Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.

EARL OF SALISBURY:
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman:
The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.

Captain:
'Tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay.
The bay-trees in our country are all wither'd
And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;
The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth
And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change;
Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,
The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
The other to enjoy by rage and war:
These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled,
As well assured Richard their king is dead.

EARL OF SALISBURY:
Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind
I see thy glory like a shooting star
Fall to the base earth from the firmament.
Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest:
Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,
And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Bring forth these men.
Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls--
Since presently your souls must part your bodies--
With too much urging your pernicious lives,
For 'twere no charity; yet, to wash your blood
From off my hands, here in the view of men
I will unfold some causes of your deaths.
You have misled a prince, a royal king,
A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,
By you unhappied and disfigured clean:
You have in manner with your sinful hours
Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him,
Broke the possession of a royal bed
And stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.
Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth,
Near to the king in blood, and near in love
Till you did make him misinterpret me,
Have stoop'd my neck under your injuries,
And sigh'd my English breath in foreign clouds,
Eating the bitter bread of banishment;
Whilst you have fed upon my signories,
Dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods,
From my own windows torn my household coat,
Razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign,
Save men's opinions and my living blood,
To show the world I am a gentleman.
This and much more, much more than twice all this,
Condemns you to the death. See them deliver'd over
To execution and the hand of death.

BUSHY:
More welcome is the stroke of death to me
Than Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.

GREEN:
My comfort is that heaven will take our souls
And plague injustice with the pains of hell.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
Uncle, you say the queen is at your house;
For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated:
Tell her I send to her my kind commends;
Take special care my greetings be deliver'd.

DUKE OF YORK:
A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'd
With letters of your love to her at large.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Thank, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away.
To fight with Glendower and his complices:
Awhile to work, and after holiday.

KING RICHARD II:
Barkloughly castle call they this at hand?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air,
After your late tossing on the breaking seas?

KING RICHARD II:
Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy
To stand upon my kingdom once again.
Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs:
As a long-parted mother with her child
Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,
So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,
And do thee favours with my royal hands.
Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,
Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense;
But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,
And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet
Which with usurping steps do trample thee:
Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies;
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords:
This earth shall have a feeling and these stones
Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king
Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king
Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.
The means that heaven yields must be embraced,
And not neglected; else, if heaven would,
And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,
The proffer'd means of succor and redress.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;
Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
Grows strong and great in substance and in power.

KING RICHARD II:
Discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not
That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,
Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,
Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen
In murders and in outrage, boldly here;
But when from under this terrestrial ball
He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines
And darts his light through every guilty hole,
Then murders, treasons and detested sins,
The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs,
Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?
So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,
Who all this while hath revell'd in the night
Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes,
Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,
His treasons will sit blushing in his face,
Not able to endure the sight of day,
But self-affrighted tremble at his sin.
Not all the water in the rough rude sea
Can wash the balm off from an anointed king;
The breath of worldly men cannot depose
The deputy elected by the Lord:
For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd
To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,
God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay
A glorious angel: then, if angels fight,
Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
Welcome, my lord how far off lies your power?

EARL OF SALISBURY:
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
Than this weak arm: discomfort guides my tongue
And bids me speak of nothing but despair.
One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,
Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth:
O, call back yesterday, bid time return,
And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!
To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,
O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state:
For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead.
Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?

KING RICHARD II:
But now the blood of twenty thousand men
Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;
And, till so much blood thither come again,
Have I not reason to look pale and dead?
All souls that will be safe fly from my side,
For time hath set a blot upon my pride.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.

KING RICHARD II:
I had forgot myself; am I not king?
Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.
Is not the king's name twenty thousand names?
Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes
At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,
Ye favourites of a king: are we not high?
High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York
Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
More health and happiness betide my liege
Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!

KING RICHARD II:
Mine ear is open and my heart prepared;
The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.
Say, is my kingdom lost? why, 'twas my care
And what loss is it to be rid of care?
Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?
Greater he shall not be; if he serve God,
We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so:
Revolt our subjects? that we cannot mend;
They break their faith to God as well as us:
Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay:
The worst is death, and death will have his day.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd
To bear the tidings of calamity.
Like an unseasonable stormy day,
Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
As if the world were all dissolved to tears,
So high above his limits swells the rage
Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land
With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps
Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices,
Strive to speak big and clap their female joints
In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown:
The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows
Of double-fatal yew against thy state;
Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills
Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,
And all goes worse than I have power to tell.

KING RICHARD II:
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?
What is become of Bushy? where is Green?
That they have let the dangerous enemy
Measure our confines with such peaceful steps?
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it:
I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.

KING RICHARD II:
O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!
Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!
Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart!
Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!
Would they make peace? terrible hell make war
Upon their spotted souls for this offence!

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Sweet love, I see, changing his property,
Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate:
Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made
With heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse
Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Where is the duke my father with his power?

KING RICHARD II:
No matter where; of comfort no man speak:
Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs;
Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth,
Let's choose executors and talk of wills:
And yet not so, for what can we bequeath
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke's,
And nothing can we call our own but death
And that small model of the barren earth
Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground
And tell sad stories of the death of kings;
How some have been deposed; some slain in war,
Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed;
Some poison'd by their wives: some sleeping kill'd;
All murder'd: for within the hollow crown
That rounds the mortal temples of a king
Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits,
Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,
Allowing him a breath, a little scene,
To monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks,
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
As if this flesh which walls about our life,
Were brass impregnable, and humour'd thus
Comes at the last and with a little pin
Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!
Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood
With solemn reverence: throw away respect,
Tradition, form and ceremonious duty,
For you have but mistook me all this while:
I live with bread like you, feel want,
Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,
How can you say to me, I am a king?

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,
But presently prevent the ways to wail.
To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,
And so your follies fight against yourself.
Fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight:
And fight and die is death destroying death;
Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
My father hath a power; inquire of him
And learn to make a body of a limb.

KING RICHARD II:
Thou chidest me well: proud Bolingbroke, I come
To change blows with thee for our day of doom.
This ague fit of fear is over-blown;
An easy task it is to win our own.
Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Men judge by the complexion of the sky
The state and inclination of the day:
So may you by my dull and heavy eye,
My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.
I play the torturer, by small and small
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke,
And all your northern castles yielded up,
And all your southern gentlemen in arms
Upon his party.

KING RICHARD II:
Thou hast said enough.
Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth
Of that sweet way I was in to despair!
What say you now? what comfort have we now?
By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly
That bids me be of comfort any more.
Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away;
A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.
That power I have, discharge; and let them go
To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
For I have none: let no man speak again
To alter this, for counsel is but vain.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
My liege, one word.

KING RICHARD II:
He does me double wrong
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers: let them hence away,
From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
So that by this intelligence we learn
The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury
Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed
With some few private friends upon this coast.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The news is very fair and good, my lord:
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.

DUKE OF YORK:
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
To say 'King Richard:' alack the heavy day
When such a sacred king should hide his head.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Your grace mistakes; only to be brief
Left I his title out.

DUKE OF YORK:
The time hath been,
Would you have been so brief with him, he would
Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
For taking so the head, your whole head's length.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.

DUKE OF YORK:
Take not, good cousin, further than you should.
Lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself
Against their will. But who comes here?
Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?

HENRY PERCY:
The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,
Against thy entrance.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Royally!
Why, it contains no king?

HENRY PERCY:
Yes, my good lord,
It doth contain a king; King Richard lies
Within the limits of yon lime and stone:
And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman
Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Noble lords,
Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver:
Henry Bolingbroke
On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand
And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
To his most royal person, hither come
Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
Provided that my banishment repeal'd
And lands restored again be freely granted:
If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen:
The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench
The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,
My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
Go, signify as much, while here we march
Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
Let's march without the noise of threatening drum,
That from this castle's tatter'd battlements
Our fair appointments may be well perused.
Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
With no less terror than the elements
Of fire and water, when their thundering shock
At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water:
The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain
My waters; on the earth, and not on him.
March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
See, see, King Richard doth himself appear,
As doth the blushing discontented sun
From out the fiery portal of the east,
When he perceives the envious clouds are bent
To dim his glory and to stain the track
Of his bright passage to the occident.

DUKE OF YORK:
Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye,
As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth
Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe,
That any harm should stain so fair a show!

KING RICHARD II:
We are amazed; and thus long have we stood
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
To pay their awful duty to our presence?
If we be not, show us the hand of God
That hath dismissed us from our stewardship;
For well we know, no hand of blood and bone
Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,
Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
And though you think that all, as you have done,
Have torn their souls by turning them from us,
And we are barren and bereft of friends;
Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,
Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf
Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike
Your children yet unborn and unbegot,
That lift your vassal hands against my head
And threat the glory of my precious crown.
Tell Bolingbroke--for yond methinks he stands--
That every stride he makes upon my land
Is dangerous treason: he is come to open
The purple testament of bleeding war;
But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons
Shall ill become the flower of England's face,
Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace
To scarlet indignation and bedew
Her pastures' grass with faithful English blood.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The king of heaven forbid our lord the king
Should so with civil and uncivil arms
Be rush'd upon! Thy thrice noble cousin
Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand;
And by the honourable tomb he swears,
That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,
And by the royalties of both your bloods,
Currents that spring from one most gracious head,
And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
And by the worth and honour of himself,
Comprising all that may be sworn or said,
His coming hither hath no further scope
Than for his lineal royalties and to beg
Enfranchisement immediate on his knees:
Which on thy royal party granted once,
His glittering arms he will commend to rust,
His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart
To faithful service of your majesty.
This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;
And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.

KING RICHARD II:
Northumberland, say thus the king returns:
His noble cousin is right welcome hither;
And all the number of his fair demands
Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction:
With all the gracious utterance thou hast
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,
To look so poorly and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
Defiance to the traitor, and so die?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle words
Till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.

KING RICHARD II:
O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine,
That laid the sentence of dread banishment
On yon proud man, should take it off again
With words of sooth! O that I were as great
As is my grief, or lesser than my name!
Or that I could forget what I have been,
Or not remember what I must be now!
Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat,
Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.

KING RICHARD II:
What must the king do now? must he submit?
The king shall do it: must he be deposed?
The king shall be contented: must he lose
The name of king? o' God's name, let it go:
I'll give my jewels for a set of beads,
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
My gay apparel for an almsman's gown,
My figured goblets for a dish of wood,
My sceptre for a palmer's walking staff,
My subjects for a pair of carved saints
And my large kingdom for a little grave,
A little little grave, an obscure grave;
Or I'll be buried in the king's highway,
Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet
May hourly trample on their sovereign's head;
For on my heart they tread now whilst I live;
And buried once, why not upon my head?
Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin!
We'll make foul weather with despised tears;
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,
And make a dearth in this revolting land.
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,
And make some pretty match with shedding tears?
As thus, to drop them still upon one place,
Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
Within the earth; and, therein laid,--there lies
Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.
Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see
I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,
What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty
Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord, in the base court he doth attend
To speak with you; may it please you to come down.

KING RICHARD II:
Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon,
Wanting the manage of unruly jades.
In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,
To come at traitors' calls and do them grace.
In the base court? Come down? Down, court!
down, king!
For night-owls shriek where mounting larks
should sing.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What says his majesty?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Sorrow and grief of heart
Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man
Yet he is come.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Stand all apart,
And show fair duty to his majesty.
My gracious lord,--

KING RICHARD II:
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee
To make the base earth proud with kissing it:
Me rather had my heart might feel your love
Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.
Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,
Thus high at least, although your knee be low.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.

KING RICHARD II:
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,
As my true service shall deserve your love.

KING RICHARD II:
Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,
That know the strong'st and surest way to get.
Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes;
Tears show their love, but want their remedies.
Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
Though you are old enough to be my heir.
What you will have, I'll give, and willing too;
For do we must what force will have us do.
Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Yea, my good lord.

KING RICHARD II:
Then I must not say no.

QUEEN:
What sport shall we devise here in this garden,
To drive away the heavy thought of care?

Lady:
Madam, we'll play at bowls.

QUEEN:
'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
And that my fortune rubs against the bias.

Lady:
Madam, we'll dance.

QUEEN:
My legs can keep no measure in delight,
When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:
Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.

Lady:
Madam, we'll tell tales.

QUEEN:
Of sorrow or of joy?

Lady:
Of either, madam.

QUEEN:
Of neither, girl:
For of joy, being altogether wanting,
It doth remember me the more of sorrow;
Or if of grief, being altogether had,
It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:
For what I have I need not to repeat;
And what I want it boots not to complain.

Lady:
Madam, I'll sing.

QUEEN:
'Tis well that thou hast cause
But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.

Lady:
I could weep, madam, would it do you good.

QUEEN:
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
And never borrow any tear of thee.
But stay, here come the gardeners:
Let's step into the shadow of these trees.
My wretchedness unto a row of pins,
They'll talk of state; for every one doth so
Against a change; woe is forerun with woe.

Gardener:
Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,
Which, like unruly children, make their sire
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:
Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
Go thou, and like an executioner,
Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,
That look too lofty in our commonwealth:
All must be even in our government.
You thus employ'd, I will go root away
The noisome weeds, which without profit suck
The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.

Servant:
Why should we in the compass of a pale
Keep law and form and due proportion,
Showing, as in a model, our firm estate,
When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,
Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin'd,
Her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs
Swarming with caterpillars?

Gardener:
Hold thy peace:
He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring
Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf:
The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,
That seem'd in eating him to hold him up,
Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke,
I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.

Servant:
What, are they dead?

Gardener:
They are; and Bolingbroke
Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it
That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land
As we this garden! We at time of year
Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees,
Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,
With too much riches it confound itself:
Had he done so to great and growing men,
They might have lived to bear and he to taste
Their fruits of duty: superfluous branches
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:
Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.

Servant:
What, think you then the king shall be deposed?

Gardener:
Depress'd he is already, and deposed
'Tis doubt he will be: letters came last night
To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's,
That tell black tidings.

QUEEN:
O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!
Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden,
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee
To make a second fall of cursed man?
Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?
Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth,
Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how,
Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.

Gardener:
Pardon me, madam: little joy have I
To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh'd:
In your lord's scale is nothing but himself,
And some few vanities that make him light;
But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
Besides himself, are all the English peers,
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
Post you to London, and you will find it so;
I speak no more than every one doth know.

QUEEN:
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
Doth not thy embassage belong to me,
And am I last that knows it? O, thou think'st
To serve me last, that I may longest keep
Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go,
To meet at London London's king in woe.
What, was I born to this, that my sad look
Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,
Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.

GARDENER:
Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,
I would my skill were subject to thy curse.
Here did she fall a tear; here in this place
I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace:
Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
In the remembrance of a weeping queen.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Call forth Bagot.
Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind;
What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death,
Who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd
The bloody office of his timeless end.

BAGOT:
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.

BAGOT:
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.
In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted,
I heard you say, 'Is not my arm of length,
That reacheth from the restful English court
As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?'
Amongst much other talk, that very time,
I heard you say that you had rather refuse
The offer of an hundred thousand crowns
Than Bolingbroke's return to England;
Adding withal how blest this land would be
In this your cousin's death.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Princes and noble lords,
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars,
On equal terms to give him chastisement?
Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd
With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
There is my gage, the manual seal of death,
That marks thee out for hell: I say, thou liest,
And will maintain what thou hast said is false
In thy heart-blood, though being all too base
To stain the temper of my knightly sword.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Excepting one, I would he were the best
In all this presence that hath moved me so.

LORD FITZWATER:
If that thy valour stand on sympathy,
There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine:
By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st,
I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it
That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death.
If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest;
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.

LORD FITZWATER:
Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.

HENRY PERCY:
Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true
In this appeal as thou art all unjust;
And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
To prove it on thee to the extremest point
Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
An if I do not, may my hands rot off
And never brandish more revengeful steel
Over the glittering helmet of my foe!

Lord:
I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;
And spur thee on with full as many lies
As may be holloa'd in thy treacherous ear
From sun to sun: there is my honour's pawn;
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Who sets me else? by heaven, I'll throw at all:
I have a thousand spirits in one breast,
To answer twenty thousand such as you.

DUKE OF SURREY:
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well
The very time Aumerle and you did talk.

LORD FITZWATER:
'Tis very true: you were in presence then;
And you can witness with me this is true.

DUKE OF SURREY:
As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.

LORD FITZWATER:
Surrey, thou liest.

DUKE OF SURREY:
Dishonourable boy!
That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,
That it shall render vengeance and revenge
Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie
In earth as quiet as thy father's skull:
In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn;
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.

LORD FITZWATER:
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!
If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,
And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies,
And lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith,
To tie thee to my strong correction.
As I intend to thrive in this new world,
Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal:
Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say
That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men
To execute the noble duke at Calais.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage
That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this,
If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
These differences shall all rest under gage
Till Norfolk be repeal'd: repeal'd he shall be,
And, though mine enemy, restored again
To all his lands and signories: when he's return'd,
Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
That honourable day shall ne'er be seen.
Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought
For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens:
And toil'd with works of war, retired himself
To Italy; and there at Venice gave
His body to that pleasant country's earth,
And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,
Under whose colours he had fought so long.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
As surely as I live, my lord.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom
Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants,
Your differences shall all rest under gage
Till we assign you to your days of trial.

DUKE OF YORK:
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
From plume-pluck'd Richard; who with willing soul
Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields
To the possession of thy royal hand:
Ascend his throne, descending now from him;
And long live Henry, fourth of that name!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
Marry. God forbid!
Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Would God that any in this noble presence
Were enough noble to be upright judge
Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would
Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
What subject can give sentence on his king?
And who sits here that is not Richard's subject?
Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,
Although apparent guilt be seen in them;
And shall the figure of God's majesty,
His captain, steward, deputy-elect,
Anointed, crowned, planted many years,
Be judged by subject and inferior breath,
And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God,
That in a Christian climate souls refined
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!
I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king:
My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,
Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king:
And if you crown him, let me prophesy:
The blood of English shall manure the ground,
And future ages groan for this foul act;
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,
And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars
Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;
Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny
Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd
The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.
O, if you raise this house against this house,
It will the woefullest division prove
That ever fell upon this cursed earth.
Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,
Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,
Of capital treason we arrest you here.
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge
To keep him safely till his day of trial.
May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
He may surrender; so we shall proceed
Without suspicion.

DUKE OF YORK:
I will be his conduct.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Lords, you that here are under our arrest,
Procure your sureties for your days of answer.
Little are we beholding to your love,
And little look'd for at your helping hands.

KING RICHARD II:
Alack, why am I sent for to a king,
Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
Wherewith I reign'd? I hardly yet have learn'd
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs:
Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me
To this submission. Yet I well remember
The favours of these men: were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!' to me?
So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve,
Found truth in all but one: I, in twelve thousand, none.
God save the king! Will no man say amen?
Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.
God save the king! although I be not he;
And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.
To do what service am I sent for hither?

DUKE OF YORK:
To do that office of thine own good will
Which tired majesty did make thee offer,
The resignation of thy state and crown
To Henry Bolingbroke.

KING RICHARD II:
Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown;
Here cousin:
On this side my hand, and on that side yours.
Now is this golden crown like a deep well
That owes two buckets, filling one another,
The emptier ever dancing in the air,
The other down, unseen and full of water:
That bucket down and full of tears am I,
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I thought you had been willing to resign.

KING RICHARD II:
My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine:
You may my glories and my state depose,
But not my griefs; still am I king of those.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.

KING RICHARD II:
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
My care is loss of care, by old care done;
Your care is gain of care, by new care won:
The cares I give I have, though given away;
They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Are you contented to resign the crown?

KING RICHARD II:
Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;
Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.
Now mark me, how I will undo myself;
I give this heavy weight from off my head
And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,
The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;
With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
With mine own hands I give away my crown,
With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
With mine own breath release all duty's rites:
All pomp and majesty I do forswear;
My manors, rents, revenues I forego;
My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny:
God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!
God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,
And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!
Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,
And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit!
God save King Harry, unking'd Richard says,
And send him many years of sunshine days!
What more remains?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
No more, but that you read
These accusations and these grievous crimes
Committed by your person and your followers
Against the state and profit of this land;
That, by confessing them, the souls of men
May deem that you are worthily deposed.

KING RICHARD II:
Must I do so? and must I ravel out
My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland,
If thy offences were upon record,
Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
There shouldst thou find one heinous article,
Containing the deposing of a king
And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven:
Nay, all of you that stand and look upon,
Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,
Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands
Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates
Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross,
And water cannot wash away your sin.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord, dispatch; read o'er these articles.

KING RICHARD II:
Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see:
And yet salt water blinds them not so much
But they can see a sort of traitors here.
Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
I find myself a traitor with the rest;
For I have given here my soul's consent
To undeck the pompous body of a king;
Made glory base and sovereignty a slave,
Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord,--

KING RICHARD II:
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,
Nor no man's lord; I have no name, no title,
No, not that name was given me at the font,
But 'tis usurp'd: alack the heavy day,
That I have worn so many winters out,
And know not now what name to call myself!
O that I were a mockery king of snow,
Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,
To melt myself away in water-drops!
Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
An if my word be sterling yet in England,
Let it command a mirror hither straight,
That it may show me what a face I have,
Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.

KING RICHARD II:
Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The commons will not then be satisfied.

KING RICHARD II:
They shall be satisfied: I'll read enough,
When I do see the very book indeed
Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
Give me the glass, and therein will I read.
No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck
So many blows upon this face of mine,
And made no deeper wounds? O flattering glass,
Like to my followers in prosperity,
Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face
That every day under his household roof
Did keep ten thousand men? was this the face
That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?
Was this the face that faced so many follies,
And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke?
A brittle glory shineth in this face:
As brittle as the glory is the face;
For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.
Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,
How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd
The shadow or your face.

KING RICHARD II:
Say that again.
The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see:
'Tis very true, my grief lies all within;
And these external manners of laments
Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
That swells with silence in the tortured soul;
There lies the substance: and I thank thee, king,
For thy great bounty, that not only givest
Me cause to wail but teachest me the way
How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon,
And then be gone and trouble you no more.
Shall I obtain it?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Name it, fair cousin.

KING RICHARD II:
'Fair cousin'? I am greater than a king:
For when I was a king, my flatterers
Were then but subjects; being now a subject,
I have a king here to my flatterer.
Being so great, I have no need to beg.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Yet ask.

KING RICHARD II:
And shall I have?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
You shall.

KING RICHARD II:
Then give me leave to go.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Whither?

KING RICHARD II:
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.

KING RICHARD II:
O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,
That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
On Wednesday next we solemnly set down
Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.

Abbot:
A woeful pageant have we here beheld.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
The woe's to come; the children yet unborn.
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
You holy clergymen, is there no plot
To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?

Abbot:
My lord,
Before I freely speak my mind herein,
You shall not only take the sacrament
To bury mine intents, but also to effect
Whatever I shall happen to devise.
I see your brows are full of discontent,
Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears:
Come home with me to supper; and I'll lay
A plot shall show us all a merry day.

QUEEN:
This way the king will come; this is the way
To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower,
To whose flint bosom my condemned lord
Is doom'd a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke:
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
Have any resting for her true king's queen.
But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
My fair rose wither: yet look up, behold,
That you in pity may dissolve to dew,
And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.
Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,
Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb,
And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn,
Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee,
When triumph is become an alehouse guest?

KING RICHARD II:
Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,
To make my end too sudden: learn, good soul,
To think our former state a happy dream;
From which awaked, the truth of what we are
Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,
To grim Necessity, and he and I
Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France
And cloister thee in some religious house:
Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
Which our profane hours here have stricken down.

QUEEN:
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
Transform'd and weaken'd? hath Bolingbroke deposed
Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart?
The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw,
And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
To be o'erpower'd; and wilt thou, pupil-like,
Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,
And fawn on rage with base humility,
Which art a lion and a king of beasts?

KING RICHARD II:
A king of beasts, indeed; if aught but beasts,
I had been still a happy king of men.
Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France:
Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,
As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.
In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
With good old folks and let them tell thee tales
Of woeful ages long ago betid;
And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs,
Tell thou the lamentable tale of me
And send the hearers weeping to their beds:
For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue
And in compassion weep the fire out;
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
For the deposing of a rightful king.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed:
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
And, madam, there is order ta'en for you;
With all swift speed you must away to France.

KING RICHARD II:
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
The time shall not be many hours of age
More than it is ere foul sin gathering head
Shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think,
Though he divide the realm and give thee half,
It is too little, helping him to all;
And he shall think that thou, which know'st the way
To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
Being ne'er so little urged, another way
To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
The love of wicked men converts to fear;
That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both
To worthy danger and deserved death.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My guilt be on my head, and there an end.
Take leave and part; for you must part forthwith.

KING RICHARD II:
Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate
A twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,
And then betwixt me and my married wife.
Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me;
And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.
Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north,
Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;
My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,
She came adorned hither like sweet May,
Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.

QUEEN:
And must we be divided? must we part?

KING RICHARD II:
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.

QUEEN:
Banish us both and send the king with me.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
That were some love but little policy.

QUEEN:
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.

KING RICHARD II:
So two, together weeping, make one woe.
Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;
Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.
Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.

QUEEN:
So longest way shall have the longest moans.

KING RICHARD II:
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,
And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,
Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief;
One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.

QUEEN:
Give me mine own again; 'twere no good part
To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
So, now I have mine own again, be gone,
That I might strive to kill it with a groan.

KING RICHARD II:
We make woe wanton with this fond delay:
Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
My lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
When weeping made you break the story off,
of our two cousins coming into London.

DUKE OF YORK:
Where did I leave?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
At that sad stop, my lord,
Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.

DUKE OF YORK:
Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed
Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know,
With slow but stately pace kept on his course,
Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee,
Bolingbroke!'
You would have thought the very windows spake,
So many greedy looks of young and old
Through casements darted their desiring eyes
Upon his visage, and that all the walls
With painted imagery had said at once
'Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!'
Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck,
Bespake them thus: 'I thank you, countrymen:'
And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?

DUKE OF YORK:
As in a theatre, the eyes of men,
After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious;
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
Did scowl on gentle Richard; no man cried 'God save him!'
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home:
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head:
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles,
The badges of his grief and patience,
That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted
And barbarism itself have pitied him.
But heaven hath a hand in these events,
To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,
Whose state and honour I for aye allow.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Here comes my son Aumerle.

DUKE OF YORK:
Aumerle that was;
But that is lost for being Richard's friend,
And, madam, you must call him Rutland now:
I am in parliament pledge for his truth
And lasting fealty to the new-made king.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Welcome, my son: who are the violets now
That strew the green lap of the new come spring?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:
God knows I had as lief be none as one.

DUKE OF YORK:
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.
What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
For aught I know, my lord, they do.

DUKE OF YORK:
You will be there, I know.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
If God prevent not, I purpose so.

DUKE OF YORK:
What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?
Yea, look'st thou pale? let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
My lord, 'tis nothing.

DUKE OF YORK:
No matter, then, who see it;
I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
I do beseech your grace to pardon me:
It is a matter of small consequence,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.

DUKE OF YORK:
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.
I fear, I fear,--

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What should you fear?
'Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into
For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.

DUKE OF YORK:
Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond
That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.
Boy, let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.

DUKE OF YORK:
I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.
Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What is the matter, my lord?

DUKE OF YORK:
Ho! who is within there?
Saddle my horse.
God for his mercy, what treachery is here!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why, what is it, my lord?

DUKE OF YORK:
Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse.
Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,
I will appeach the villain.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What is the matter?

DUKE OF YORK:
Peace, foolish woman.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Good mother, be content; it is no more
Than my poor life must answer.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Thy life answer!

DUKE OF YORK:
Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.
Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.

DUKE OF YORK:
Give me my boots, I say.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why, York, what wilt thou do?
Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
Have we more sons? or are we like to have?
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age,
And rob me of a happy mother's name?
Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?

DUKE OF YORK:
Thou fond mad woman,
Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament,
And interchangeably set down their hands,
To kill the king at Oxford.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
He shall be none;
We'll keep him here: then what is that to him?

DUKE OF YORK:
Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,
I would appeach him.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Hadst thou groan'd for him
As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.
But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect
That I have been disloyal to thy bed,
And that he is a bastard, not thy son:
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:
He is as like thee as a man may be,
Not like to me, or any of my kin,
And yet I love him.

DUKE OF YORK:
Make way, unruly woman!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse;
Spur post, and get before him to the king,
And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
I'll not be long behind; though I be old,
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:
And never will I rise up from the ground
Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
'Tis full three months since I did see him last;
If any plague hang over us, 'tis he.
I would to God, my lords, he might be found:
Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there,
For there, they say, he daily doth frequent,
With unrestrained loose companions,
Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes,
And beat our watch, and rob our passengers;
Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy,
Takes on the point of honour to support
So dissolute a crew.

HENRY PERCY:
My lord, some two days since I saw the prince,
And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
And what said the gallant?

HENRY PERCY:
His answer was, he would unto the stews,
And from the common'st creature pluck a glove,
And wear it as a favour; and with that
He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
As dissolute as desperate; yet through both
I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years
May happily bring forth. But who comes here?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Where is the king?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What means our cousin, that he stares and looks
So wildly?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty,
To have some conference with your grace alone.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
What is the matter with our cousin now?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth
Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Intended or committed was this fault?
If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
To win thy after-love I pardon thee.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Then give me leave that I may turn the key,
That no man enter till my tale be done.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Have thy desire.

DUKE OF YORK:

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Villain, I'll make thee safe.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.

DUKE OF YORK:

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What is the matter, uncle? speak;
Recover breath; tell us how near is danger,
That we may arm us to encounter it.

DUKE OF YORK:
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know
The treason that my haste forbids me show.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd:
I do repent me; read not my name there
My heart is not confederate with my hand.

DUKE OF YORK:
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.
I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king;
Fear, and not love, begets his penitence:
Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove
A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy!
O loyal father of a treacherous son!
Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain,
From when this stream through muddy passages
Hath held his current and defiled himself!
Thy overflow of good converts to bad,
And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
This deadly blot in thy digressing son.

DUKE OF YORK:
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd;
And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,
As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.
Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,
Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies:
Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath,
The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.

DUCHESS OF YORK:

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
A woman, and thy aunt, great king; 'tis I.
Speak with me, pity me, open the door.
A beggar begs that never begg'd before.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Our scene is alter'd from a serious thing,
And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.'
My dangerous cousin, let your mother in:
I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.

DUKE OF YORK:
If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,
More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.
This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound;
This let alone will all the rest confound.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O king, believe not this hard-hearted man!
Love loving not itself none other can.

DUKE OF YORK:
Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Rise up, good aunt.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Not yet, I thee beseech:
For ever will I walk upon my knees,
And never see day that the happy sees,
Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy,
By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.

DUKE OF YORK:
Against them both my true joints bended be.
Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face;
His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest;
His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast:
He prays but faintly and would be denied;
We pray with heart and soul and all beside:
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know;
Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow:
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy;
Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.
Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have
That mercy which true prayer ought to have.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Good aunt, stand up.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Nay, do not say, 'stand up;'
Say, 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.'
And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,
'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.
I never long'd to hear a word till now;
Say 'pardon,' king; let pity teach thee how:
The word is short, but not so short as sweet;
No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.

DUKE OF YORK:
Speak it in French, king; say, 'pardonne moi.'

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?
Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,
That set'st the word itself against the word!
Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land;
The chopping French we do not understand.
Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there;
Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear;
That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,
Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Good aunt, stand up.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I do not sue to stand;
Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O happy vantage of a kneeling knee!
Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again;
Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain,
But makes one pardon strong.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
With all my heart
I pardon him.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
A god on earth thou art.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot,
With all the rest of that consorted crew,
Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
Good uncle, help to order several powers
To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are:
They shall not live within this world, I swear,
But I will have them, if I once know where.
Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu:
Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new.

EXTON:
Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake,
'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?'
Was it not so?

Servant:
These were his very words.

EXTON:
'Have I no friend?' quoth he: he spake it twice,
And urged it twice together, did he not?

Servant:
He did.

EXTON:
And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me,
And who should say, 'I would thou wert the man'
That would divorce this terror from my heart;'
Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go:
I am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.

KING RICHARD II:
I have been studying how I may compare
This prison where I live unto the world:
And for because the world is populous
And here is not a creature but myself,
I cannot do it; yet I'll hammer it out.
My brain I'll prove the female to my soul,
My soul the father; and these two beget
A generation of still-breeding thoughts,
And these same thoughts people this little world,
In humours like the people of this world,
For no thought is contented. The better sort,
As thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd
With scruples and do set the word itself
Against the word:
As thus, 'Come, little ones,' and then again,
'It is as hard to come as for a camel
To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.'
Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot
Unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails
May tear a passage through the flinty ribs
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls,
And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves
That they are not the first of fortune's slaves,
Nor shall not be the last; like silly beggars
Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame,
That many have and others must sit there;
And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
Bearing their own misfortunes on the back
Of such as have before endured the like.
Thus play I in one person many people,
And none contented: sometimes am I king;
Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,
And so I am: then crushing penury
Persuades me I was better when a king;
Then am I king'd again: and by and by
Think that I am unking'd by Bolingbroke,
And straight am nothing: but whate'er I be,
Nor I nor any man that but man is
With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased
With being nothing. Music do I hear?
Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is,
When time is broke and no proportion kept!
So is it in the music of men's lives.
And here have I the daintiness of ear
To cheque time broke in a disorder'd string;
But for the concord of my state and time
Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.
I wasted time, and now doth time waste me;
For now hath time made me his numbering clock:
My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar
Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,
Whereto my finger, like a dial's point,
Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart,
Which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans
Show minutes, times, and hours: but my time
Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,
While I stand fooling here, his Jack o' the clock.
This music mads me; let it sound no more;
For though it have holp madmen to their wits,
In me it seems it will make wise men mad.
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!
For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard
Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.

Groom:
Hail, royal prince!

KING RICHARD II:
Thanks, noble peer;
The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.
What art thou? and how comest thou hither,
Where no man never comes but that sad dog
That brings me food to make misfortune live?

Groom:
I was a poor groom of thy stable, king,
When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York,
With much ado at length have gotten leave
To look upon my sometimes royal master's face.
O, how it yearn'd my heart when I beheld
In London streets, that coronation-day,
When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,
That horse that thou so often hast bestrid,
That horse that I so carefully have dress'd!

KING RICHARD II:
Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,
How went he under him?

Groom:
So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.

KING RICHARD II:
So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back!
That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand;
This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.
Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,
Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck
Of that proud man that did usurp his back?
Forgiveness, horse! why do I rail on thee,
Since thou, created to be awed by man,
Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse;
And yet I bear a burthen like an ass,
Spurr'd, gall'd and tired by jouncing Bolingbroke.

Keeper:
Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.

KING RICHARD II:
If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.

Groom:
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.

Keeper:
My lord, will't please you to fall to?

KING RICHARD II:
Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.

Keeper:
My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, who
lately came from the king, commands the contrary.

KING RICHARD II:
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.

Keeper:
Help, help, help!

KING RICHARD II:
How now! what means death in this rude assault?
Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
Go thou, and fill another room in hell.
That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire
That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand
Hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land.
Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high;
Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.

EXTON:
As full of valour as of royal blood:
Both have I spill'd; O would the deed were good!
For now the devil, that told me I did well,
Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.
This dead king to the living king I'll bear
Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear
Is that the rebels have consumed with fire
Our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire;
But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.
Welcome, my lord what is the news?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.
The next news is, I have to London sent
The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent:
The manner of their taking may appear
At large discoursed in this paper here.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.

LORD FITZWATER:
My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London
The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely,
Two of the dangerous consorted traitors
That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;
Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.

HENRY PERCY:
The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
With clog of conscience and sour melancholy
Hath yielded up his body to the grave;
But here is Carlisle living, to abide
Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Carlisle, this is your doom:
Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,
More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life;
So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife:
For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,
High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.

EXTON:
Great king, within this coffin I present
Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies
The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,
Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought
A deed of slander with thy fatal hand
Upon my head and all this famous land.

EXTON:
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
They love not poison that do poison need,
Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead,
I hate the murderer, love him murdered.
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,
But neither my good word nor princely favour:
With Cain go wander through shades of night,
And never show thy head by day nor light.
Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe,
That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow:
Come, mourn with me for that I do lament,
And put on sullen black incontinent:
I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land,
To wash this blood off from my guilty hand:
March sadly after; grace my mournings here;
In weeping after this untimely bier.


SAMPSON:
Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.

GREGORY:
No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON:
I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

GREGORY:
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.

SAMPSON:
I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY:
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMPSON:
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY:
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand:
therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.

SAMPSON:
A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will
take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

GREGORY:
That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes
to the wall.

SAMPSON:
True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push
Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids
to the wall.

GREGORY:
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

SAMPSON:
'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I
have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the
maids, and cut off their heads.

GREGORY:
The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON:
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;
take it in what sense thou wilt.

GREGORY:
They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON:
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and
'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY:
'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes
two of the house of the Montagues.

SAMPSON:
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.

GREGORY:
How! turn thy back and run?

SAMPSON:
Fear me not.

GREGORY:
No, marry; I fear thee!

SAMPSON:
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

GREGORY:
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
they list.

SAMPSON:
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them;
which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.

ABRAHAM:
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON:
I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAHAM:
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON:

GREGORY:
No.

SAMPSON:
No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I
bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY:
Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAHAM:
Quarrel sir! no, sir.

SAMPSON:
If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you.

ABRAHAM:
No better.

SAMPSON:
Well, sir.

GREGORY:
Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen.

SAMPSON:
Yes, better, sir.

ABRAHAM:
You lie.

SAMPSON:
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.

BENVOLIO:
Part, fools!
Put up your swords; you know not what you do.

TYBALT:
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO:
I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT:
What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Have at thee, coward!

First Citizen:
Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!

CAPULET:
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET:
A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?

CAPULET:
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

MONTAGUE:
Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE:
Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.

PRINCE:
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,--
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time, all the rest depart away:
You Capulet; shall go along with me:
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our further pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

MONTAGUE:
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO:
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:
I drew to part them: in the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn:
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE:
O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO:
Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
So early walking did I see your son:
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood:
I, measuring his affections by my own,
That most are busied when they're most alone,
Pursued my humour not pursuing his,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE:
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the furthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Away from the light steals home my heavy son,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out
And makes himself an artificial night:
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO:
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE:
I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO:
Have you importuned him by any means?

MONTAGUE:
Both by myself and many other friends:
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
Is to himself--I will not say how true--
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
We would as willingly give cure as know.

BENVOLIO:
See, where he comes: so please you, step aside;
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.

MONTAGUE:
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.

BENVOLIO:
Good-morrow, cousin.

ROMEO:
Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO:
But new struck nine.

ROMEO:
Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO:
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

ROMEO:
Not having that, which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO:
In love?

ROMEO:
Out--

BENVOLIO:
Of love?

ROMEO:
Out of her favour, where I am in love.

BENVOLIO:
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

ROMEO:
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
O any thing, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,
sick health!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO:
No, coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO:
Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO:
At thy good heart's oppression.

ROMEO:
Why, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:
What is it else? a madness most discreet,
A choking gall and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.

BENVOLIO:
Soft! I will go along;
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO:
Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.

BENVOLIO:
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.

ROMEO:
What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO:
Groan! why, no.
But sadly tell me who.

ROMEO:
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will:
Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO:
I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved.

ROMEO:
A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.

BENVOLIO:
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO:
Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit;
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor,
That when she dies with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO:
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO:
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,
For beauty starved with her severity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair:
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO:
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.

ROMEO:
O, teach me how I should forget to think.

BENVOLIO:
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
Examine other beauties.

ROMEO:
'Tis the way
To call hers exquisite, in question more:
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows
Being black put us in mind they hide the fair;
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve, but as a note
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO:
I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.

CAPULET:
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS:
Of honourable reckoning are you both;
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

CAPULET:
But saying o'er what I have said before:
My child is yet a stranger in the world;
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS:
Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET:
And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent is but a part;
An she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love; and you, among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-apparell'd April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Which on more view, of many mine being one
May stand in number, though in reckoning none,
Come, go with me.
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

Servant:
Find them out whose names are written here! It is
written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his
yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with
his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am
sent to find those persons whose names are here
writ, and can never find what names the writing
person hath here writ. I must to the learned.--In good time.

BENVOLIO:
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with another's languish:
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO:
Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO:
For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO:
For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO:
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO:
Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is;
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.

Servant:
God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

ROMEO:
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

Servant:
Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I
pray, can you read any thing you see?

ROMEO:
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.

Servant:
Ye say honestly: rest you merry!

ROMEO:
Stay, fellow; I can read.
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady
widow of Vitravio; Signior Placentio and his lovely
nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine
uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece
Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin
Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair
assembly: whither should they come?

Servant:
Up.

ROMEO:
Whither?

Servant:
To supper; to our house.

ROMEO:
Whose house?

Servant:
My master's.

ROMEO:
Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.

Servant:
Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the
great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house
of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
Rest you merry!

BENVOLIO:
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,
With all the admired beauties of Verona:
Go thither; and, with unattainted eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO:
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
And these, who often drown'd could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO:
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye:
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
Your lady's love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.

ROMEO:
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.

LADY CAPULET:
Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.

Nurse:
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird!
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!

JULIET:
How now! who calls?

Nurse:
Your mother.

JULIET:
Madam, I am here.
What is your will?

LADY CAPULET:
This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile,
We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again;
I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.

Nurse:
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET:
She's not fourteen.

Nurse:
I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--
And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four--
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammas-tide?

LADY CAPULET:
A fortnight and odd days.

Nurse:
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--
Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me: but, as I said,
On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,--
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;
My lord and you were then at Mantua:--
Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,
To bid me trudge:
And since that time it is eleven years;
For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood,
She could have run and waddled all about;
For even the day before, she broke her brow:
And then my husband--God be with his soul!
A' was a merry man--took up the child:
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.'
To see, now, how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'

LADY CAPULET:
Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace.

Nurse:
Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;
A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly:
'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.'

JULIET:
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

Nurse:
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET:
Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET:
It is an honour that I dream not of.

Nurse:
An honour! were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.

LADY CAPULET:
Well, think of marriage now; younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers: by my count,
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

Nurse:
A man, young lady! lady, such a man
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET:
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

Nurse:
Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower.

LADY CAPULET:
What say you? can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
Examine every married lineament,
And see how one another lends content
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide:
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less.

Nurse:
No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET:
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?

JULIET:
I'll look to like, if looking liking move:
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

Servant:
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you
called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in
the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must
hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.

LADY CAPULET:
We follow thee.
Juliet, the county stays.

Nurse:
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.

ROMEO:
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without a apology?

BENVOLIO:
The date is out of such prolixity:
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance:
But let them measure us by what they will;
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.

ROMEO:
Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling;
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO:
Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes
With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO:
You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO:
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO:
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO:
Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO:
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in:
A visor for a visor! what care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO:
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in,
But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO:
A torch for me: let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO:
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

ROMEO:
Nay, that's not so.

MERCUTIO:
I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO:
And we mean well in going to this mask;
But 'tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO:
Why, may one ask?

ROMEO:
I dream'd a dream to-night.

MERCUTIO:
And so did I.

ROMEO:
Well, what was yours?

MERCUTIO:
That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO:
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO:
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
The traces of the smallest spider's web,
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat,
Not so big as a round little worm
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees,
O'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,
Then dreams, he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night,
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she--

ROMEO:
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Thou talk'st of nothing.

MERCUTIO:
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO:
This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves;
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO:
I fear, too early: for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night's revels and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But He, that hath the steerage of my course,
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.

BENVOLIO:
Strike, drum.

First Servant:
Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He
shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!

Second Servant:
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.

First Servant:
Away with the joint-stools, remove the
court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save
me a piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let
the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
Antony, and Potpan!

Second Servant:
Ay, boy, ready.

First Servant:
You are looked for and called for, asked for and
sought for, in the great chamber.

Second Servant:
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys; be
brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.

CAPULET:
Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:
You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
For you and I are past our dancing days:
How long is't now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

Second Capulet:
By'r lady, thirty years.

CAPULET:
What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:
'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,
Come pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.

Second Capulet:
'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.

CAPULET:
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO:

Servant:
I know not, sir.

ROMEO:
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT:
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET:
Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT:
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET:
Young Romeo is it?

TYBALT:
'Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET:
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone;
He bears him like a portly gentleman;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:
I would not for the wealth of all the town
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT:
It fits, when such a villain is a guest:
I'll not endure him.

CAPULET:
He shall be endured:
What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to;
Am I the master here, or you? go to.
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!

TYBALT:
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.

CAPULET:
Go to, go to;
You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:
You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.
Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go:
Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame!
I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!

TYBALT:
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall
Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.

ROMEO:

JULIET:
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

ROMEO:
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET:
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO:
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET:
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.

ROMEO:
Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.

JULIET:
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

ROMEO:
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.

JULIET:
You kiss by the book.

Nurse:
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

ROMEO:
What is her mother?

Nurse:
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous
I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal;
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.

ROMEO:
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.

BENVOLIO:
Away, begone; the sport is at the best.

ROMEO:
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.

CAPULET:
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:
I'll to my rest.

JULIET:
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?

Nurse:
The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET:
What's he that now is going out of door?

Nurse:
Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio.

JULIET:
What's he that follows there, that would not dance?

Nurse:
I know not.

JULIET:
Go ask his name: if he be married.
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

Nurse:
His name is Romeo, and a Montague;
The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET:
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed enemy.

Nurse:
What's this? what's this?

JULIET:
A rhyme I learn'd even now
Of one I danced withal.

Nurse:
Anon, anon!
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.

Chorus:
Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike betwitched by the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new-beloved any where:
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.

ROMEO:
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo! my cousin Romeo!

MERCUTIO:
He is wise;
And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO:
He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, I'll conjure too.
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove;'
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,
When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!

BENVOLIO:
And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO:
This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down;
That were some spite: my invocation
Is fair and honest, and in his mistress' name
I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO:
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,
To be consorted with the humorous night:
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO:
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
An open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!
Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO:
Go, then; for 'tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.

ROMEO:
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she:
Be not her maid, since she is envious;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
It is my lady, O, it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that?
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!

JULIET:
Ay me!

ROMEO:
She speaks:
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET:
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO:

JULIET:
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
What's in a name? that which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for that name which is no part of thee
Take all myself.

ROMEO:
I take thee at thy word:
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET:
What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night
So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO:
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee;
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET:
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:
Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?

ROMEO:
Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.

JULIET:
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO:
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls;
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do that dares love attempt;
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.

JULIET:
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO:
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET:
I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO:
I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
And but thou love me, let them find me here:
My life were better ended by their hate,
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET:
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?

ROMEO:
By love, who first did prompt me to inquire;
He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
I would adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET:
Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke: but farewell compliment!
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'
And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,
Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries
Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light:
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
My true love's passion: therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO:
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--

JULIET:
O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO:
What shall I swear by?

JULIET:
Do not swear at all;
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.

ROMEO:
If my heart's dear love--

JULIET:
Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract to-night:
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!

ROMEO:
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET:
What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?

ROMEO:
The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.

JULIET:
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it:
And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO:
Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?

JULIET:
But to be frank, and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu!
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.

ROMEO:
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard.
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.

JULIET:
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

Nurse:

JULIET:
I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,
I do beseech thee--

Nurse:

JULIET:
By and by, I come:--
To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:
To-morrow will I send.

ROMEO:
So thrive my soul--

JULIET:
A thousand times good night!

ROMEO:
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from
their books,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.

JULIET:
Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice,
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,
With repetition of my Romeo's name.

ROMEO:
It is my soul that calls upon my name:
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears!

JULIET:
Romeo!

ROMEO:
My dear?

JULIET:
At what o'clock to-morrow
Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO:
At the hour of nine.

JULIET:
I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO:
Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET:
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.

ROMEO:
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET:
'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:
And yet no further than a wanton's bird;
Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO:
I would I were thy bird.

JULIET:
Sweet, so would I:
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night! parting is such
sweet sorrow,
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

ROMEO:
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave that is her womb,
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:
For nought so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give,
Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO:
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distemper'd head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art up-roused by some distemperature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.

ROMEO:
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO:
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?

ROMEO:
I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,
That's by me wounded: both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO:
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage: when and where and how
We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us to-day.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:
And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.

ROMEO:
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO:
And bad'st me bury love.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Not in a grave,
To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO:
I pray thee, chide not; she whom I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me,
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.

ROMEO:
O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.

MERCUTIO:
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home to-night?

BENVOLIO:
Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO:
Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO:
Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

MERCUTIO:
A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO:
Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO:
Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO:
Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead; stabbed with a
white wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a
love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the
blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to
encounter Tybalt?

BENVOLIO:
Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO:
More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is
the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as
you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and
proportion; rests me his minim rest, one, two, and
the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the
very first house, of the first and second cause:
ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the
hai!

BENVOLIO:
The what?

MERCUTIO:
The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,
a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good
whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with
these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these
perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,
that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their
bones, their bones!

BENVOLIO:
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.

MERCUTIO:
Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,
how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers
that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a
kitchen-wench; marry, she had a better love to
be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gipsy;
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey
eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation
to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
fairly last night.

ROMEO:
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?

MERCUTIO:
The ship, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?

ROMEO:
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in
such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.

MERCUTIO:
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours
constrains a man to bow in the hams.

ROMEO:
Meaning, to court'sy.

MERCUTIO:
Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO:
A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO:
Pink for flower.

MERCUTIO:
Right.

ROMEO:
Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO:
Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast
worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it
is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.

ROMEO:
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singleness.

MERCUTIO:
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.

ROMEO:
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have
done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of
thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:
was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO:
Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast
not there for the goose.

MERCUTIO:
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO:
Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO:
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
sharp sauce.

ROMEO:
And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?

MERCUTIO:
O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an
inch narrow to an ell broad!

ROMEO:
I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added
to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.

MERCUTIO:
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art
thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:
for this drivelling love is like a great natural,
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO:
Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO:
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

BENVOLIO:
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

MERCUTIO:
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short:
for I was come to the whole depth of my tale; and
meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.

ROMEO:
Here's goodly gear!

MERCUTIO:
A sail, a sail!

BENVOLIO:
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.

Nurse:
Peter!

PETER:
Anon!

Nurse:
My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO:
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the
fairer face.

Nurse:
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO:
God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.

Nurse:
Is it good den?

MERCUTIO:
'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the
dial is now upon the prick of noon.

Nurse:
Out upon you! what a man are you!

ROMEO:
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
mar.

Nurse:
By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to mar,'
quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I
may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO:
I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when
you have found him than he was when you sought him:
I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.

Nurse:
You say well.

MERCUTIO:
Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith;
wisely, wisely.

Nurse:
if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
you.

BENVOLIO:
She will indite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO:
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!

ROMEO:
What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO:
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,
that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
An old hare hoar,
And an old hare hoar,
Is very good meat in lent
But a hare that is hoar
Is too much for a score,
When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll
to dinner, thither.

ROMEO:
I will follow you.

MERCUTIO:
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell,
'lady, lady, lady.'

Nurse:
Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy
merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?

ROMEO:
A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
to in a month.

Nurse:
An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him
down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such
Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am
none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by
too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?

PETER:
I saw no man use you a pleasure; if I had, my weapon
should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare
draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
good quarrel, and the law on my side.

Nurse:
Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:
and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you
out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:
but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into
a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman
is young; and, therefore, if you should deal double
with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered
to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.

ROMEO:
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
protest unto thee--

Nurse:
Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much:
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

ROMEO:
What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.

Nurse:
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which, as
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO:
Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.

Nurse:
No truly sir; not a penny.

ROMEO:
Go to; I say you shall.

Nurse:
This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.

ROMEO:
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.

Nurse:
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.

ROMEO:
What say'st thou, my dear nurse?

Nurse:
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?

ROMEO:
I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.

NURSE:
Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,
Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:--O, there
is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain
lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief
see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her
sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer
man; but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks
as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not
rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO:
Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.

Nurse:
Ah. mocker! that's the dog's name; R is for
the--No; I know it begins with some other
letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of
it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
to hear it.

ROMEO:
Commend me to thy lady.

Nurse:
Ay, a thousand times.
Peter!

PETER:
Anon!

Nurse:
Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.

JULIET:
The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so.
O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over louring hills:
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me:
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
O God, she comes!
O honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

Nurse:
Peter, stay at the gate.

JULIET:
Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

Nurse:
I am a-weary, give me leave awhile:
Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!

JULIET:
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse, speak.

Nurse:
Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET:
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?

Nurse:
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not
how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he; though his
face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels
all men's; and for a hand, and a foot, and a body,
though they be not to be talked on, yet they are
past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy,
but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?

JULIET:
No, no: but all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? what of that?

Nurse:
Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about,
To catch my death with jaunting up and down!

JULIET:
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?

Nurse:
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
warrant, a virtuous,--Where is your mother?

JULIET:
Where is my mother! why, she is within;
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?'

Nurse:
O God's lady dear!
Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET:
Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?

Nurse:
Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?

JULIET:
I have.

Nurse:
Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
There stays a husband to make you a wife:
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go; I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell.

JULIET:
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
That after hours with sorrow chide us not!

ROMEO:
Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare;
It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite:
Therefore love moderately; long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint:
A lover may bestride the gossamer
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.

JULIET:
Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET:
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO:
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET:
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament:
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till holy church incorporate two in one.

BENVOLIO:
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO:
Thou art like one of those fellows that when he
enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword
upon the table and says 'God send me no need of
thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws
it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.

BENVOLIO:
Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO:
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as
any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as
soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO:
And what to?

MERCUTIO:
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none
shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,
thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,
or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou
wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what
eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of
meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as
an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a
man for coughing in the street, because he hath
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:
didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing
his new doublet before Easter? with another, for
tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou
wilt tutor me from quarrelling!

BENVOLIO:
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man
should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO:
The fee-simple! O simple!

BENVOLIO:
By my head, here come the Capulets.

MERCUTIO:
By my heel, I care not.

TYBALT:
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.

MERCUTIO:
And but one word with one of us? couple it with
something; make it a word and a blow.

TYBALT:
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you
will give me occasion.

MERCUTIO:
Could you not take some occasion without giving?

TYBALT:
Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--

MERCUTIO:
Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an
thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
discords: here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall
make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO:
We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO:
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

TYBALT:
Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.

MERCUTIO:
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'

TYBALT:
Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
No better term than this,--thou art a villain.

ROMEO:
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting: villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.

TYBALT:
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO:
I do protest, I never injured thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:
And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
As dearly as my own,--be satisfied.

MERCUTIO:
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Alla stoccata carries it away.
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?

TYBALT:
What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO:
Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and as you
shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher
by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your
ears ere it be out.

TYBALT:
I am for you.

ROMEO:
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO:
Come, sir, your passado.

ROMEO:
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:
Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!

MERCUTIO:
I am hurt.
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO:
What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO:
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.

ROMEO:
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO:
No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
church-door; but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for
me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a
rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I
was hurt under your arm.

ROMEO:
I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO:
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,
And soundly too: your houses!

ROMEO:
This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation stain'd
With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!

BENVOLIO:
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO:
This day's black fate on more days doth depend;
This but begins the woe, others must end.

BENVOLIO:
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO:
Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company:
Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT:
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO:
This shall determine that.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!

ROMEO:
O, I am fortune's fool!

BENVOLIO:
Why dost thou stay?

First Citizen:
Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO:
There lies that Tybalt.

First Citizen:
Up, sir, go with me;
I charge thee in the princes name, obey.

PRINCE:
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO:
O noble prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET:
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt
O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!

PRINCE:
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO:
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;
Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure: all this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than
his tongue,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET:
He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true:
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

PRINCE:
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE:
Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE:
And for that offence
Immediately we do exile him hence:
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine:
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:
Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will:
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

JULIET:
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner
As Phaethon would whip you to the west,
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,
Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?

Nurse:
Ay, ay, the cords.

JULIET:
Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?

Nurse:
Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!

JULIET:
Can heaven be so envious?

Nurse:
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET:
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:
I am not I, if there be such an I;
Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'
If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, no:
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

Nurse:
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,--
God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
All in gore-blood; I swounded at the sight.

JULIET:
O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once!
To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!

Nurse:
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead!

JULIET:
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?
My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
For who is living, if those two are gone?

Nurse:
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.

JULIET:
O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?

Nurse:
It did, it did; alas the day, it did!

JULIET:
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!

Nurse:
There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae:
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo!

JULIET:
Blister'd be thy tongue
For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

Nurse:
Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?

JULIET:
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;
But, O, it presses to my memory,
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo--banished;'
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Was woe enough, if it had ended there:
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Which modern lamentations might have moved?
But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,
'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word,
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!'
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?

Nurse:
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET:
Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled:
He made you for a highway to my bed;
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords, come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

Nurse:
Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo
To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.

JULIET:
O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man:
Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.

ROMEO:
Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company:
I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.

ROMEO:
What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips,
Not body's death, but body's banishment.

ROMEO:
Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;'
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hence from Verona art thou banished:
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO:
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,
And world's exile is death: then banished,
Is death mis-term'd: calling death banishment,
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince,
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
And turn'd that black word death to banishment:
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

ROMEO:
'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
But Romeo may not: more validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion-flies than Romeo: they my seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty,
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo may not; he is banished:
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly:
They are free men, but I am banished.
And say'st thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But 'banished' to kill me?--'banished'?
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.

ROMEO:
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I'll give thee armour to keep off that word:
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO:
Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

ROMEO:
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO:
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO:
Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up;
Run to my study. By and by! God's will,
What simpleness is this! I come, I come!
Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?

Nurse:

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Welcome, then.

Nurse:
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

Nurse:
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Just in her case! O woful sympathy!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man:
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;
Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO:
Nurse!

Nurse:
Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.

ROMEO:
Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
Doth she not think me an old murderer,
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?

Nurse:
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed; and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

ROMEO:
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold thy desperate hand:
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast:
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?
And stay thy lady too that lives in thee,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit;
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;
There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew'st Tybalt; there are thou happy too:
The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy:
A pack of blessings lights up upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady;
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
Romeo is coming.

Nurse:
O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
To hear good counsel: O, what learning is!
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO:
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

Nurse:
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

ROMEO:
How well my comfort is revived by this!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguised from hence:
Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here:
Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; good night.

ROMEO:
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee: Farewell.

CAPULET:
Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,
That we have had no time to move our daughter:
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I:--Well, we were born to die.
'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night:
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been a-bed an hour ago.

PARIS:
These times of woe afford no time to woo.
Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.

LADY CAPULET:
I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.

CAPULET:
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love;
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--
But, soft! what day is this?

PARIS:
Monday, my lord,

CAPULET:
Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? do you like this haste?
We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two;
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS:
My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.

CAPULET:
Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.
Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me! it is so very very late,
That we may call it early by and by.
Good night.

JULIET:
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO:
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET:
Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I:
It is some meteor that the sun exhales,
To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua:
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.

ROMEO:
Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:
I have more care to stay than will to go:
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
How is't, my soul? let's talk; it is not day.

JULIET:
It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us:
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes,
O, now I would they had changed voices too!
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day,
O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.

ROMEO:
More light and light; more dark and dark our woes!

Nurse:
Madam!

JULIET:
Nurse?

Nurse:
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:
The day is broke; be wary, look about.

JULIET:
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO:
Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.

JULIET:
Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days:
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo!

ROMEO:
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET:
O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO:
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

JULIET:
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.

ROMEO:
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!

JULIET:
O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune;
For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.

LADY CAPULET:

JULIET:
Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?

LADY CAPULET:
Why, how now, Juliet!

JULIET:
Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET:
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;
Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love;
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET:
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET:
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.

JULIET:
Feeling so the loss,
Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET:
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.

JULIET:
What villain madam?

LADY CAPULET:
That same villain, Romeo.

JULIET:

LADY CAPULET:
That is, because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET:
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!

LADY CAPULET:
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram,
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET:
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--
Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named, and cannot come to him.
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that slaughter'd him!

LADY CAPULET:
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET:
And joy comes well in such a needy time:
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

LADY CAPULET:
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expect'st not nor I look'd not for.

JULIET:
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?

LADY CAPULET:
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,
The gallant, young and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET:
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!

LADY CAPULET:
Here comes your father; tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

CAPULET:
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of my brother's son
It rains downright.
How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind;
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs;
Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!
Have you deliver'd to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET:
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave!

CAPULET:
Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

JULIET:
Not proud, you have; but thankful, that you have:
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.

CAPULET:
How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?
'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not;'
And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you,
Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!

LADY CAPULET:
Fie, fie! what, are you mad?

JULIET:
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET:
Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face:
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child;
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her:
Out on her, hilding!

Nurse:
God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET:
And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.

Nurse:
I speak no treason.

CAPULET:
O, God ye god-den.

Nurse:
May not one speak?

CAPULET:
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET:
You are too hot.

CAPULET:
God's bread! it makes me mad:
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her match'd: and having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man;
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To answer 'I'll not wed; I cannot love,
I am too young; I pray you, pardon me.'
But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you:
Graze where you will you shall not house with me:
Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in
the streets,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
Trust to't, bethink you; I'll not be forsworn.

JULIET:
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET:
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.

JULIET:
O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.

Nurse:
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing,
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the county.
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead; or 'twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.

JULIET:
Speakest thou from thy heart?

Nurse:
And from my soul too;
Or else beshrew them both.

JULIET:
Amen!

Nurse:
What?

JULIET:
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in: and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
To make confession and to be absolved.

Nurse:
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.

JULIET:
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the friar, to know his remedy:
If all else fail, myself have power to die.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.

PARIS:
My father Capulet will have it so;
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
You say you do not know the lady's mind:
Uneven is the course, I like it not.

PARIS:
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears;
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society:
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE:

PARIS:
Happily met, my lady and my wife!

JULIET:
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS:
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET:
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
That's a certain text.

PARIS:
Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET:
To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS:
Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET:
I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS:
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET:
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.

PARIS:
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.

JULIET:
The tears have got small victory by that;
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS:
Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.

JULIET:
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS:
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.

JULIET:
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS:
God shield I should disturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.

JULIET:
O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
It strains me past the compass of my wits:
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this county.

JULIET:
Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak; I long to die,
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That copest with death himself to scape from it:
And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.

JULIET:
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of yonder tower;
Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;
Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble;
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow:
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,
Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:
And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come: and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame;
If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,
Abate thy valour in the acting it.

JULIET:
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET:
Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father!

CAPULET:
So many guests invite as here are writ.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

Second Servant:
You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they
can lick their fingers.

CAPULET:
How canst thou try them so?

Second Servant:
Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his
own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his
fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET:
Go, be gone.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?

Nurse:
Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET:
Well, he may chance to do some good on her:
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.

Nurse:
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET:
How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?

JULIET:
Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you!
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

CAPULET:
Send for the county; go tell him of this:
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.

JULIET:
I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell;
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET:
Why, I am glad on't; this is well: stand up:
This is as't should be. Let me see the county;
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar,
Our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET:
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?

LADY CAPULET:
No, not till Thursday; there is time enough.

CAPULET:
Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.

LADY  CAPULET:
We shall be short in our provision:
'Tis now near night.

CAPULET:
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone;
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.

JULIET:
Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,
I pray thee, leave me to myself to-night,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin.

LADY CAPULET:
What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?

JULIET:
No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
For, I am sure, you have your hands full all,
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET:
Good night:
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.

JULIET:
Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
That almost freezes up the heat of life:
I'll call them back again to comfort me:
Nurse! What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there.
What if it be a poison, which the friar
Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!
Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,--
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where, for these many hundred years, the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed:
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort;--
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad:--
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears?
And madly play with my forefather's joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.

LADY CAPULET:
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.

Nurse:
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

CAPULET:
Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,
The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica:
Spare not for the cost.

Nurse:
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed; faith, You'll be sick to-morrow
For this night's watching.

CAPULET:
No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

LADY CAPULET:
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
But I will watch you from such watching now.

CAPULET:
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Now, fellow,
What's there?

First Servant:
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

CAPULET:
Make haste, make haste.
Sirrah, fetch drier logs:
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

Second Servant:
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

CAPULET:
Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith, 'tis day:
The county will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would: I hear him near.
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up;
I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already:
Make haste, I say.

Nurse:
Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her, she:
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!
What, not a word? you take your pennyworths now;
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest,
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,
Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the county take you in your bed;
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!
I must needs wake you; Lady! lady! lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!
O, well-a-day, that ever I was born!
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!

LADY CAPULET:
What noise is here?

Nurse:
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET:
What is the matter?

Nurse:
Look, look! O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET:
O me, O me! My child, my only life,
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Help, help! Call help.

CAPULET:
For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.

Nurse:
She's dead, deceased, she's dead; alack the day!

LADY CAPULET:
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!

CAPULET:
Ha! let me see her: out, alas! she's cold:
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Life and these lips have long been separated:
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

Nurse:
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET:
O woful time!

CAPULET:
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET:
Ready to go, but never to return.
O son! the night before thy wedding-day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,
And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's.

PARIS:
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET:
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!

Nurse:
O woe! O woful, woful, woful day!
Most lamentable day, most woful day,
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this:
O woful day, O woful day!

PARIS:
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!

CAPULET:
Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead;
And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid:
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion;
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill,
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
She's not well married that lives married long;
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse; and, as the custom is,
In all her best array bear her to church:
For though fond nature bids us an lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

CAPULET:
All things that we ordained festival,
Turn from their office to black funeral;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
And go, Sir Paris; every one prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave:
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.

First Musician:
Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.

Nurse:
Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up;
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.

First Musician:
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

PETER:
Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease, Heart's
ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'

First Musician:
Why 'Heart's ease?'

PETER:
O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My
heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump,
to comfort me.

First Musician:
Not a dump we; 'tis no time to play now.

PETER:
You will not, then?

First Musician:
No.

PETER:
I will then give it you soundly.

First Musician:
What will you give us?

PETER:
No money, on my faith, but the gleek;
I will give you the minstrel.

First Musician:
Then I will give you the serving-creature.

PETER:
Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you,
I'll fa you; do you note me?

First Musician:
An you re us and fa us, you note us.

Second Musician:
Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

PETER:
Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you
with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer
me like men:
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
Then music with her silver sound'--
why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver
sound'? What say you, Simon Catling?

Musician:
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

PETER:
Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

Second Musician:
I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.

PETER:
Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?

Third Musician:
Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER:
O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I will say
for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,'
because musicians have no gold for sounding:
'Then music with her silver sound
With speedy help doth lend redress.'

First Musician:
What a pestilent knave is this same!

Second Musician:
Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here; tarry for the
mourners, and stay dinner.

ROMEO:
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave
to think!--
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
That I revived, and was an emperor.
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar!
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.

BALTHASAR:
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
And presently took post to tell it you:
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO:
Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!
Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.

BALTHASAR:
I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.

ROMEO:
Tush, thou art deceived:
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?

BALTHASAR:
No, my good lord.

ROMEO:
No matter: get thee gone,
And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Let's see for means: O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
I do remember an apothecary,--
And hereabouts he dwells,--which late I noted
In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples; meagre were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said
'An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
O, this same thought did but forerun my need;
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
What, ho! apothecary!

Apothecary:
Who calls so loud?

ROMEO:
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:
Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins
That the life-weary taker may fall dead
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.

Apothecary:
Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO:
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

Apothecary:
My poverty, but not my will, consents.

ROMEO:
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.

Apothecary:
Put this in any liquid thing you will,
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

ROMEO:
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murders in this loathsome world,
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell: buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.

FRIAR JOHN:
Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN:
Going to find a bare-foot brother out
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth;
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN:
I could not send it,--here it is again,--
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence;
Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN:
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Now must I to the monument alone;
Within three hours will fair Juliet wake:
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come;
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!

PARIS:
Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof:
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along,
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

PAGE:

PARIS:
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--
O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones;--
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.

ROMEO:
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my lady's face;
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR:
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

ROMEO:
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that:
Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR:

ROMEO:
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!

PARIS:
This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,
It is supposed, the fair creature died;
And here is come to do some villanous shame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.

ROMEO:
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone;
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head,
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither arm'd against myself:
Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say,
A madman's mercy bade thee run away.

PARIS:
I do defy thy conjurations,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO:
Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!

PAGE:
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.

PARIS:
O, I am slain!
If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

ROMEO:
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet:
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave;
A grave? O no! a lantern, slaughter'd youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
A lightning before death: O, how may I
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee,
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee;
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again: here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chamber-maids; O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest,
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
Here's to my love!
O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?

BALTHASAR:
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,
It burneth in the Capel's monument.

BALTHASAR:
It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
One that you love.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Who is it?

BALTHASAR:
Romeo.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR:
Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR:
I dare not, sir
My master knows not but I am gone hence;
And fearfully did menace me with death,
If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Stay, then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me:
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

BALTHASAR:
As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Romeo!
Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.

JULIET:
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
Come, go, good Juliet,
I dare no longer stay.

JULIET:
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips;
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make die with a restorative.
Thy lips are warm.

First Watchman:

JULIET:
Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
This is thy sheath;
there rust, and let me die.

PAGE:
This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.

First Watchman:
The ground is bloody; search about the churchyard:
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain these two days buried.
Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
Raise up the Montagues: some others search:
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.

Second Watchman:
Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.

First Watchman:
Hold him in safety, till the prince come hither.

Third Watchman:
Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:
We took this mattock and this spade from him,
As he was coming from this churchyard side.

First Watchman:
A great suspicion: stay the friar too.

PRINCE:
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning's rest?

CAPULET:
What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?

LADY CAPULET:
The people in the street cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run,
With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE:
What fear is this which startles in our ears?

First Watchman:
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new kill'd.

PRINCE:
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

First Watchman:
Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man;
With instruments upon them, fit to open
These dead men's tombs.

CAPULET:
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista'en--for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,--
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!

LADY CAPULET:
O me! this sight of death is as a bell,
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

PRINCE:
Come, Montague; for thou art early up,
To see thy son and heir more early down.

MONTAGUE:
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:
What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE:
Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE:
O thou untaught! what manners is in this?
To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE:
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their
true descent;
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me of this direful murder;
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.

PRINCE:
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:
I married them; and their stol'n marriage-day
Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from the city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
To County Paris: then comes she to me,
And, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,
That he should hither come as this dire night,
To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking,
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell,
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth,
And bear this work of heaven with patience:
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,
Unto the rigour of severest law.

PRINCE:
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?

BALTHASAR:
I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
I departed not and left him there.

PRINCE:
Give me the letter; I will look on it.
Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE:
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
And by and by my master drew on him;
And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE:
This letter doth make good the friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!
See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
And I for winking at your discords too
Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.

CAPULET:
O brother Montague, give me thy hand:
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

MONTAGUE:
But I can give thee more:
For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
That while Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET:
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!

PRINCE:
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head:
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

WARWICK:
I wonder how the king escaped our hands.

YORK:
While we pursued the horsemen of the north,
He slily stole away and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Cheer'd up the drooping army; and himself,
Lord Clifford and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
Charged our main battle's front, and breaking in
Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.

EDWARD:
Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerously;
I cleft his beaver with a downright blow:
That this is true, father, behold his blood.

MONTAGUE:
And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,
Whom I encounter'd as the battles join'd.

RICHARD:
Speak thou for me and tell them what I did.

YORK:
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
But is your grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?

NORFOLK:
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!

RICHARD:
Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.

WARWICK:
And so do I. Victorious Prince of York,
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
This is the palace of the fearful king,
And this the regal seat: possess it, York;
For this is thine and not King Henry's heirs'

YORK:
Assist me, then, sweet Warwick, and I will;
For hither we have broken in by force.

NORFOLK:
We'll all assist you; he that flies shall die.

YORK:
Thanks, gentle Norfolk: stay by me, my lords;
And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.

WARWICK:
And when the king comes, offer no violence,
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.

YORK:
The queen this day here holds her parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her council:
By words or blows here let us win our right.

RICHARD:
Arm'd as we are, let's stay within this house.

WARWICK:
The bloody parliament shall this be call'd,
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king,
And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice
Hath made us by-words to our enemies.

YORK:
Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute;
I mean to take possession of my right.

WARWICK:
Neither the king, nor he that loves him best,
The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing, if Warwick shake his bells.
I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares:
Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.

KING HENRY VI:
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state: belike he means,
Back'd by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father.
And thine, Lord Clifford; and you both have vow'd revenge
On him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!

CLIFFORD:
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.

WESTMORELAND:
What, shall we suffer this? let's pluck him down:
My heart for anger burns; I cannot brook it.

KING HENRY VI:
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmoreland.

CLIFFORD:
Patience is for poltroons, such as he:
He durst not sit there, had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here in the parliament
Let us assail the family of York.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Well hast thou spoken, cousin: be it so.

KING HENRY VI:
Ah, know you not the city favours them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?

EXETER:
But when the duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.

KING HENRY VI:
Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of the parliament-house!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words and threats
Shall be the war that Henry means to use.
Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne,
and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet;
I am thy sovereign.

YORK:
I am thine.

EXETER:
For shame, come down: he made thee Duke of York.

YORK:
'Twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.

EXETER:
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.

WARWICK:
Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
In following this usurping Henry.

CLIFFORD:
Whom should he follow but his natural king?

WARWICK:
True, Clifford; and that's Richard Duke of York.

KING HENRY VI:
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?

YORK:
It must and shall be so: content thyself.

WARWICK:
Be Duke of Lancaster; let him be king.

WESTMORELAND:
He is both king and Duke of Lancaster;
And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.

WARWICK:
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those which chased you from the field
And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
March'd through the city to the palace gates.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;
And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.

WESTMORELAND:
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons,
Thy kinsman and thy friends, I'll have more lives
Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.

CLIFFORD:
Urge it no more; lest that, instead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger
As shall revenge his death before I stir.

WARWICK:
Poor Clifford! how I scorn his worthless threats!

YORK:
Will you we show our title to the crown?
If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.

KING HENRY VI:
What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York;
Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March:
I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop
And seized upon their towns and provinces.

WARWICK:
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.

KING HENRY VI:
The lord protector lost it, and not I:
When I was crown'd I was but nine months old.

RICHARD:
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.
Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.

EDWARD:
Sweet father, do so; set it on your head.

MONTAGUE:
Good brother, as thou lovest and honourest arms,
Let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.

RICHARD:
Sound drums and trumpets, and the king will fly.

YORK:
Sons, peace!

KING HENRY VI:
Peace, thou! and give King Henry leave to speak.

WARWICK:
Plantagenet shall speak first: hear him, lords;
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him shall not live.

KING HENRY VI:
Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
No: first shall war unpeople this my realm;
Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
And now in England to our heart's great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
My title's good, and better far than his.

WARWICK:
Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be king.

KING HENRY VI:
Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.

YORK:
'Twas by rebellion against his king.

KING HENRY VI:

YORK:
What then?

KING HENRY VI:
An if he may, then am I lawful king;
For Richard, in the view of many lords,
Resign'd the crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was, and I am his.

YORK:
He rose against him, being his sovereign,
And made him to resign his crown perforce.

WARWICK:
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd,
Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?

EXETER:
No; for he could not so resign his crown
But that the next heir should succeed and reign.

KING HENRY VI:
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?

EXETER:
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.

YORK:
Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?

EXETER:
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.

KING HENRY VI:

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,
Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.

WARWICK:
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Thou art deceived: 'tis not thy southern power,
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the duke up in despite of me.

CLIFFORD:
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence:
May that ground gape and swallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!

KING HENRY VI:
O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!

YORK:
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.
What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?

WARWICK:
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
Write up his title with usurping blood.

KING HENRY VI:
My Lord of Warwick, hear me but one word:
Let me for this my life-time reign as king.

YORK:
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou livest.

KING HENRY VI:
I am content: Richard Plantagenet,
Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.

CLIFFORD:
What wrong is this unto the prince your son!

WARWICK:
What good is this to England and himself!

WESTMORELAND:
Base, fearful and despairing Henry!

CLIFFORD:
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!

WESTMORELAND:
I cannot stay to hear these articles.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Nor I.

CLIFFORD:
Come, cousin, let us tell the queen these news.

WESTMORELAND:
Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,
In whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unmanly deed!

CLIFFORD:
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandon'd and despised!

WARWICK:
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.

EXETER:
They seek revenge and therefore will not yield.

KING HENRY VI:
Ah, Exeter!

WARWICK:
Why should you sigh, my lord?

KING HENRY VI:
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may: I here entail
The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever;
Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
To cease this civil war, and, whilst I live,
To honour me as thy king and sovereign,
And neither by treason nor hostility
To seek to put me down and reign thyself.

YORK:
This oath I willingly take and will perform.

WARWICK:
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet embrace him.

KING HENRY VI:
And long live thou and these thy forward sons!

YORK:
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.

EXETER:
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes!

YORK:
Farewell, my gracious lord; I'll to my castle.

WARWICK:
And I'll keep London with my soldiers.

NORFOLK:
And I to Norfolk with my followers.

MONTAGUE:
And I unto the sea from whence I came.

KING HENRY VI:
And I, with grief and sorrow, to the court.

EXETER:
Here comes the queen, whose looks bewray her anger:
I'll steal away.

KING HENRY VI:
Exeter, so will I.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Nay, go not from me; I will follow thee.

KING HENRY VI:
Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah, wretched man! would I had died a maid
And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father
Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourish'd him as I did with my blood,
Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there,
Rather than have that savage duke thine heir
And disinherited thine only son.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Father, you cannot disinherit me:
If you be king, why should not I succeed?

KING HENRY VI:
Pardon me, Margaret; pardon me, sweet son:
The Earl of Warwick and the duke enforced me.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Enforced thee! art thou king, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch!
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son and me;
And given unto the house of York such head
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
What is it, but to make thy sepulchre
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is chancellor and the lord of Calais;
Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas;
The duke is made protector of the realm;
And yet shalt thou be safe? such safety finds
The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes
Before I would have granted to that act.
But thou preferr'st thy life before thine honour:
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself
Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act of parliament be repeal'd
Whereby my son is disinherited.
The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours
Will follow mine, if once they see them spread;
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of the house of York.
Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, let's away;
Our army is ready; come, we'll after them.

KING HENRY VI:
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thou hast spoke too much already: get thee gone.

KING HENRY VI:
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, to be murder'd by his enemies.

PRINCE EDWARD:
When I return with victory from the field
I'll see your grace: till then I'll follow her.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Come, son, away; we may not linger thus.

KING HENRY VI:
Poor queen! how love to me and to her son
Hath made her break out into terms of rage!
Revenged may she be on that hateful duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of me and of my son!
The loss of those three lords torments my heart:
I'll write unto them and entreat them fair.
Come, cousin you shall be the messenger.

EXETER:
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
3 KING HENRY VI

RICHARD:
Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.

EDWARD:
No, I can better play the orator.

MONTAGUE:
But I have reasons strong and forcible.

YORK:
Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife?
What is your quarrel? how began it first?

EDWARD:
No quarrel, but a slight contention.

YORK:
About what?

RICHARD:
About that which concerns your grace and us;
The crown of England, father, which is yours.

YORK:
Mine boy? not till King Henry be dead.

RICHARD:
Your right depends not on his life or death.

EDWARD:
Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now:
By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you, father, in the end.

YORK:
I took an oath that he should quietly reign.

EDWARD:
But for a kingdom any oath may be broken:
I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.

RICHARD:
No; God forbid your grace should be forsworn.

YORK:
I shall be, if I claim by open war.

RICHARD:
I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.

YORK:
Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.

RICHARD:
An oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful magistrate,
That hath authority over him that swears:
Henry had none, but did usurp the place;
Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown;
Within whose circuit is Elysium
And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
Why do we finger thus? I cannot rest
Until the white rose that I wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.

YORK:
Richard, enough; I will be king, or die.
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.
Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk,
And tell him privily of our intent.
You Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise:
In them I trust; for they are soldiers,
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employ'd, what resteth more,
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the king not privy to my drift,
Nor any of the house of Lancaster?
But, stay: what news? Why comest thou in such post?

Messenger:
The queen with all the northern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege you in your castle:
She is hard by with twenty thousand men;
And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.

YORK:
Ay, with my sword. What! think'st thou that we fear them?
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me;
My brother Montague shall post to London:
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left protectors of the king,
With powerful policy strengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.

MONTAGUE:
Brother, I go; I'll win them, fear it not:
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour;
The army of the queen mean to besiege us.

JOHN MORTIMER:
She shall not need; we'll meet her in the field.

YORK:
What, with five thousand men?

RICHARD:
Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need:
A woman's general; what should we fear?

EDWARD:
I hear their drums: let's set our men in order,
And issue forth and bid them battle straight.

YORK:
Five men to twenty! though the odds be great,
I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.
Many a battle have I won in France,
When as the enemy hath been ten to one:
Why should I not now have the like success?
3 KING HENRY VI

RUTLAND:
Ah, whither shall I fly to 'scape their hands?
Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes!

CLIFFORD:
Chaplain, away! thy priesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of this accursed duke,
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.

Tutor:
And I, my lord, will bear him company.

CLIFFORD:
Soldiers, away with him!

Tutor:
Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both of God and man!

CLIFFORD:
How now! is he dead already? or is it fear
That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.

RUTLAND:
So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch
That trembles under his devouring paws;
And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey,
And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
And not with such a cruel threatening look.
Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
I am too mean a subject for thy wrath:
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.

CLIFFORD:
In vain thou speak'st, poor boy; my father's blood
Hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.

RUTLAND:
Then let my father's blood open it again:
He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.

CLIFFORD:
Had thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me;
No, if I digg'd up thy forefathers' graves
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York
Is as a fury to torment my soul;
And till I root out their accursed line
And leave not one alive, I live in hell.
Therefore--

RUTLAND:
O, let me pray before I take my death!
To thee I pray; sweet Clifford, pity me!

CLIFFORD:
Such pity as my rapier's point affords.

RUTLAND:
I never did thee harm: why wilt thou slay me?

CLIFFORD:
Thy father hath.

RUTLAND:
But 'twas ere I was born.
Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me,
Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in prison all my days;
And when I give occasion of offence,
Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.

CLIFFORD:
No cause!
Thy father slew my father; therefore, die.

RUTLAND:
Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!

CLIFFORD:
Plantagenet! I come, Plantagenet!
And this thy son's blood cleaving to my blade
Shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood,
Congeal'd with this, do make me wipe off both.
3 KING HENRY VI

YORK:
The army of the queen hath got the field:
My uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
And all my followers to the eager foe
Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them:
But this I know, they have demean'd themselves
Like men born to renown by life or death.
Three times did Richard make a lane to me.
And thrice cried 'Courage, father! fight it out!'
And full as oft came Edward to my side,
With purple falchion, painted to the hilt
In blood of those that had encounter'd him:
And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
Richard cried 'Charge! and give no foot of ground!'
And cried 'A crown, or else a glorious tomb!
A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!'
With this, we charged again: but, out, alas!
We bodged again; as I have seen a swan
With bootless labour swim against the tide
And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
Ah, hark! the fatal followers do pursue;
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury:
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury:
The sands are number'd that make up my life;
Here must I stay, and here my life must end.
Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchless fury to more rage:
I am your butt, and I abide your shot.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.

CLIFFORD:
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm,
With downright payment, show'd unto my father.
Now Phaethon hath tumbled from his car,
And made an evening at the noontide prick.

YORK:
My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth
A bird that will revenge upon you all:
And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? what! multitudes, and fear?

CLIFFORD:
So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons;
So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.

YORK:
O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
And in thy thought o'er-run my former time;
And, if though canst for blushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, that slanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!

CLIFFORD:
I will not bandy with thee word for word,
But buckle with thee blows, twice two for one.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Hold, valiant Clifford! for a thousand causes
I would prolong awhile the traitor's life.
Wrath makes him deaf: speak thou, Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Hold, Clifford! do not honour him so much
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart:
What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
It is war's prize to take all vantages;
And ten to one is no impeach of valour.

CLIFFORD:
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
So doth the cony struggle in the net.

YORK:
So triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty;
So true men yield, with robbers so o'ermatch'd.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
What would your grace have done unto him now?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come, make him stand upon this molehill here,
That raught at mountains with outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
What! was it you that would be England's king?
Was't you that revell'd in our parliament,
And made a preachment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and the lusty George?
And where's that valiant crook-back prodigy,
Dicky your boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
Look, York: I stain'd this napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford, with his rapier's point,
Made issue from the bosom of the boy;
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
Alas poor York! but that I hate thee deadly,
I should lament thy miserable state.
I prithee, grieve, to make me merry, York.
What, hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails
That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death?
Why art thou patient, man? thou shouldst be mad;
And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou wouldst be fee'd, I see, to make me sport:
York cannot speak, unless he wear a crown.
A crown for York! and, lords, bow low to him:
Hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king!
Ay, this is he that took King Henry's chair,
And this is he was his adopted heir.
But how is it that great Plantagenet
Is crown'd so soon, and broke his solemn oath?
As I bethink me, you should not be king
Till our King Henry had shook hands with death.
And will you pale your head in Henry's glory,
And rob his temples of the diadem,
Now in his life, against your holy oath?
O, 'tis a fault too too unpardonable!
Off with the crown, and with the crown his head;
And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.

CLIFFORD:
That is my office, for my father's sake.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Nay, stay; lets hear the orisons he makes.

YORK:
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of France,
Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth!
How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
To triumph, like an Amazonian trull,
Upon their woes whom fortune captivates!
But that thy face is, vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thou camest, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen,
Unless the adage must be verified,
That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
'Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud;
But, God he knows, thy share thereof is small:
'Tis virtue that doth make them most admired;
The contrary doth make thee wonder'd at:
'Tis government that makes them seem divine;
The want thereof makes thee abominable:
Thou art as opposite to every good
As the Antipodes are unto us,
Or as the south to the septentrion.
O tiger's heart wrapt in a woman's hide!
How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child,
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful and flexible;
Thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bids't thou me rage? why, now thou hast thy wish:
Wouldst have me weep? why, now thou hast thy will:
For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies:
And every drop cries vengeance for his death,
'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false
Frenchwoman.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Beshrew me, but his passion moves me so
That hardly can I cheque my eyes from tears.

YORK:
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood:
But you are more inhuman, more inexorable,
O, ten times more, than tigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears:
This cloth thou dip'dst in blood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do wash the blood away.
Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this:
And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears;
Yea even my foes will shed fast-falling tears,
And say 'Alas, it was a piteous deed!'
There, take the crown, and, with the crown, my curse;
And in thy need such comfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand!
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world:
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Had he been slaughter-man to all my kin,
I should not for my life but weep with him.
To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.

QUEEN MARGARET:
What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.

CLIFFORD:
Here's for my oath, here's for my father's death.

QUEEN MARGARET:
And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.

YORK:
Open Thy gate of mercy, gracious God!
My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Off with his head, and set it on York gates;
So York may overlook the town of York.
3 KING HENRY VI

EDWARD:
I wonder how our princely father 'scaped,
Or whether he be 'scaped away or no
From Clifford's and Northumberland's pursuit:
Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news;
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;
Or had he 'scaped, methinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my brother? why is he so sad?

RICHARD:
I cannot joy, until I be resolved
Where our right valiant father is become.
I saw him in the battle range about;
And watch'd him how he singled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herd of neat;
Or as a bear, encompass'd round with dogs,
Who having pinch'd a few and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.
So fared our father with his enemies;
So fled his enemies my warlike father:
Methinks, 'tis prize enough to be his son.
See how the morning opes her golden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun!
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Trimm'd like a younker prancing to his love!

EDWARD:
Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?

RICHARD:
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun;
Not separated with the racking clouds,
But sever'd in a pale clear-shining sky.
See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vow'd some league inviolable:
Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
In this the heaven figures some event.

EDWARD:
'Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meeds,
Should notwithstanding join our lights together
And over-shine the earth as this the world.
Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear
Upon my target three fair-shining suns.

RICHARD:
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,
You love the breeder better than the male.
But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?

Messenger:
Ah, one that was a woful looker-on
When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
Your princely father and my loving lord!

EDWARD:
O, speak no more, for I have heard too much.

RICHARD:
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.

Messenger:
Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them, as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks that would have enter'd Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
And many strokes, though with a little axe,
Hew down and fell the hardest-timber'd oak.
By many hands your father was subdued;
But only slaughter'd by the ireful arm
Of unrelenting Clifford and the queen,
Who crown'd the gracious duke in high despite,
Laugh'd in his face; and when with grief he wept,
The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks
A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain:
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his head, and on the gates of York
They set the same; and there it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle that e'er I view'd.

EDWARD:
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
O Clifford, boisterous Clifford! thou hast slain
The flower of Europe for his chivalry;
And treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee.
Now my soul's palace is become a prison:
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest!
For never henceforth shall I joy again,
Never, O never shall I see more joy!

RICHARD:
I cannot weep; for all my body's moisture
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart:
Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burthen;
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast,
And burns me up with flames that tears would quench.
To weep is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me
Richard, I bear thy name; I'll venge thy death,
Or die renowned by attempting it.

EDWARD:
His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;
His dukedom and his chair with me is left.

RICHARD:
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun:
For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say;
Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.

WARWICK:
How now, fair lords! What fare? what news abroad?

RICHARD:
Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recount
Our baleful news, and at each word's deliverance
Stab poniards in our flesh till all were told,
The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!

EDWARD:
O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet,
Which held three dearly as his soul's redemption,
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.

WARWICK:
Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears;
And now, to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
I, then in London keeper of the king,
Muster'd my soldiers, gather'd flocks of friends,
And very well appointed, as I thought,
March'd toward Saint Alban's to intercept the queen,
Bearing the king in my behalf along;
For by my scouts I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late decree in parliament
Touching King Henry's oath and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Alban's met
Our battles join'd, and both sides fiercely fought:
But whether 'twas the coldness of the king,
Who look'd full gently on his warlike queen,
That robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen;
Or whether 'twas report of her success;
Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigour,
Who thunders to his captives blood and death,
I cannot judge: but to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightning came and went;
Our soldiers', like the night-owl's lazy flight,
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
I cheer'd them up with justice of our cause,
With promise of high pay and great rewards:
But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
And we in them no hope to win the day;
So that we fled; the king unto the queen;
Lord George your brother, Norfolk and myself,
In haste, post-haste, are come to join with you:
For in the marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.

EDWARD:
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?

WARWICK:
Some six miles off the duke is with the soldiers;
And for your brother, he was lately sent
From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers to this needful war.

RICHARD:
'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled:
Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.

WARWICK:
Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear;
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head,
And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
Were he as famous and as bold in war
As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.

RICHARD:
I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not:
'Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.
But in this troublous time what's to be done?
Shall we go throw away our coats of steel,
And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
If for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.

WARWICK:
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out;
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me, lords. The proud insulting queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather many more proud birds,
Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax.
He swore consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the parliament;
And now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate both his oath and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong:
Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,
With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why, Via! to London will we march amain,
And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
And once again cry 'Charge upon our foes!'
But never once again turn back and fly.

RICHARD:
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak:
Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day,
That cries 'Retire,' if Warwick bid him stay.

EDWARD:
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean;
And when thou fail'st--as God forbid the hour!--
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!

WARWICK:
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York:
The next degree is England's royal throne;
For King of England shalt thou be proclaim'd
In every borough as we pass along;
And he that throws not up his cap for joy
Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets, and about our task.

RICHARD:
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.

EDWARD:
Then strike up drums: God and Saint George for us!

WARWICK:
How now! what news?

Messenger:
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The queen is coming with a puissant host;
And craves your company for speedy counsel.

WARWICK:
Why then it sorts, brave warriors, let's away.
3 KING HENRY VI

QUEEN MARGARET:
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
That sought to be encompass'd with your crown:
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?

KING HENRY VI:
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck:
To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
Withhold revenge, dear God! 'tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.

CLIFFORD:
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who 'scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn being trodden on,
And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York doth level at thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows:
He, but a duke, would have his son a king,
And raise his issue, like a loving sire;
Thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son,
Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
Which argued thee a most unloving father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them, even with those wings
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climb'd unto their nest,
Offer their own lives in their young's defence?
For shame, my liege, make them your precedent!
Were it not pity that this goodly boy
Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child,
'What my great-grandfather and his grandsire got
My careless father fondly gave away'?
Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy;
And let his manly face, which promiseth
Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.

KING HENRY VI:
Full well hath Clifford play'd the orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
That things ill-got had ever bad success?
And happy always was it for that son
Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
I'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind;
And would my father had left me no more!
For all the rest is held at such a rate
As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep
Than in possession and jot of pleasure.
Ah, cousin York! would thy best friends did know
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!

QUEEN MARGARET:
My lord, cheer up your spirits: our foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
You promised knighthood to our forward son:
Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.
Edward, kneel down.

KING HENRY VI:
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight;
And learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.

PRINCE:
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,
And in that quarrel use it to the death.

CLIFFORD:
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.

Messenger:
Royal commanders, be in readiness:
For with a band of thirty thousand men
Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York;
And in the towns, as they do march along,
Proclaims him king, and many fly to him:
Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.

CLIFFORD:
I would your highness would depart the field:
The queen hath best success when you are absent.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.

KING HENRY VI:
Why, that's my fortune too; therefore I'll stay.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Be it with resolution then to fight.

PRINCE EDWARD:
My royal father, cheer these noble lords
And hearten those that fight in your defence:
Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry 'Saint George!'

EDWARD:
Now, perjured Henry! wilt thou kneel for grace,
And set thy diadem upon my head;
Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Go, rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?

EDWARD:
I am his king, and he should bow his knee;
I was adopted heir by his consent:
Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,
You, that are king, though he do wear the crown,
Have caused him, by new act of parliament,
To blot out me, and put his own son in.

CLIFFORD:
And reason too:
Who should succeed the father but the son?

RICHARD:
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!

CLIFFORD:
Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,
Or any he the proudest of thy sort.

RICHARD:
'Twas you that kill'd young Rutland, was it not?

CLIFFORD:
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.

RICHARD:
For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight.

WARWICK:
What say'st thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick! dare you speak?
When you and I met at Saint Alban's last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.

WARWICK:
Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.

CLIFFORD:
You said so much before, and yet you fled.

WARWICK:
'Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.

RICHARD:
Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.
Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrain
The execution of my big-swoln heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.

CLIFFORD:
I slew thy father, call'st thou him a child?

RICHARD:
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland;
But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.

KING HENRY VI:
Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.

KING HENRY VI:
I prithee, give no limits to my tongue:
I am a king, and privileged to speak.

CLIFFORD:
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words; therefore be still.

RICHARD:
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword:
By him that made us all, I am resolved
that Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.

EDWARD:
Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?
A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day,
That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.

WARWICK:
If thou deny, their blood upon thy head;
For York in justice puts his armour on.

PRINCE EDWARD:
If that be right which Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong, but every thing is right.

RICHARD:
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;
For, well I wot, thou hast thy mother's tongue.

QUEEN MARGARET:
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam;
But like a foul mis-shapen stigmatic,
Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided,
As venom toads, or lizards' dreadful stings.

RICHARD:
Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,
Whose father bears the title of a king,--
As if a channel should be call'd the sea,--
Shamest thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?

EDWARD:
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns,
To make this shameless callet know herself.
Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
Although thy husband may be Menelaus;
And ne'er was Agamemnon's brother wrong'd
By that false woman, as this king by thee.
His father revell'd in the heart of France,
And tamed the king, and made the dauphin stoop;
And had he match'd according to his state,
He might have kept that glory to this day;
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal-day,
Even then that sunshine brew'd a shower for him,
That wash'd his father's fortunes forth of France,
And heap'd sedition on his crown at home.
For what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept;
And we, in pity of the gentle king,
Had slipp'd our claim until another age.

GEORGE:
But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bred us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root;
And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
Yet, know thou, since we have begun to strike,
We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down,
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.

EDWARD:
And, in this resolution, I defy thee;
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.
Sound trumpets! let our bloody colours wave!
And either victory, or else a grave.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Stay, Edward.

EDWARD:
No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay:
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
I lay me down a little while to breathe;
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
Have robb'd my strong-knit sinews of their strength,
And spite of spite needs must I rest awhile.

EDWARD:
Smile, gentle heaven! or strike, ungentle death!
For this world frowns, and Edward's sun is clouded.

WARWICK:
How now, my lord! what hap? what hope of good?

GEORGE:
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us:
What counsel give you? whither shall we fly?

EDWARD:
Bootless is flight, they follow us with wings;
And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.

RICHARD:
Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
Thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
Broach'd with the steely point of Clifford's lance;
And in the very pangs of death he cried,
Like to a dismal clangour heard from far,
'Warwick, revenge! brother, revenge my death!'
So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
That stain'd their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.

WARWICK:
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood:
I'll kill my horse, because I will not fly.
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage;
And look upon, as if the tragedy
Were play'd in jest by counterfeiting actors?
Here on my knee I vow to God above,
I'll never pause again, never stand still,
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine
Or fortune given me measure of revenge.

EDWARD:
O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine;
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine!
And, ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face,
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee,
Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,
Beseeching thee, if with they will it stands
That to my foes this body must be prey,
Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may ope,
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul!
Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
Where'er it be, in heaven or in earth.

RICHARD:
Brother, give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:
I, that did never weep, now melt with woe
That winter should cut off our spring-time so.

WARWICK:
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords farewell.

GEORGE:
Yet let us all together to our troops,
And give them leave to fly that will not stay;
And call them pillars that will stand to us;
And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As victors wear at the Olympian games:
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts;
For yet is hope of life and victory.
Forslow no longer, make we hence amain.
3 KING HENRY VI

RICHARD:
Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone:
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland; both bound to revenge,
Wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.

CLIFFORD:
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone:
This is the hand that stabb'd thy father York;
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland;
And here's the heart that triumphs in their death
And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
To execute the like upon thyself;
And so, have at thee!

RICHARD:
Nay Warwick, single out some other chase;
For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING HENRY VI:
This battle fares like to the morning's war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light,
What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide to combat with the wind;
Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by fury of the wind:
Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;
Now one the better, then another best;
Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror nor conquered:
So is the equal of this fell war.
Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
To whom God will, there be the victory!
For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,
Have chid me from the battle; swearing both
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead! if God's good will were so;
For what is in this world but grief and woe?
O God! methinks it were a happy life,
To be no better than a homely swain;
To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minutes how they run,
How many make the hour full complete;
How many hours bring about the day;
How many days will finish up the year;
How many years a mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the times:
So many hours must I tend my flock;
So many hours must I take my rest;
So many hours must I contemplate;
So many hours must I sport myself;
So many days my ewes have been with young;
So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean:
So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:
So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
Pass'd over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this! how sweet! how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shade
To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,
Than doth a rich embroider'd canopy
To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
O, yes, it doth; a thousand-fold it doth.
And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle.
His wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince's delicates,
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
His body couched in a curious bed,
When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.

Son:
Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of crowns;
And I, that haply take them from him now,
May yet ere night yield both my life and them
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
Who's this? O God! it is my father's face,
Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill'd.
O heavy times, begetting such events!
From London by the king was I press'd forth;
My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man,
Came on the part of York, press'd by his master;
And I, who at his hands received my life, him
Have by my hands of life bereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did!
And pardon, father, for I knew not thee!
My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks;
And no more words till they have flow'd their fill.

KING HENRY VI:
O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!
Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
Weep, wretched man, I'll aid thee tear for tear;
And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears, and break o'ercharged with grief.

Father:
Thou that so stoutly hast resisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold:
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: is this our foeman's face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son!
Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye! see, see what showers arise,
Blown with the windy tempest of my heart,
Upon thy words, that kill mine eye and heart!
O, pity, God, this miserable age!
What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous and unnatural,
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!

KING HENRY VI:
Woe above woe! grief more than common grief!
O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colours of our striving houses:
The one his purple blood right well resembles;
The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth:
Wither one rose, and let the other flourish;
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.

Son:
How will my mother for a father's death
Take on with me and ne'er be satisfied!

Father:
How will my wife for slaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears and ne'er be satisfied!

KING HENRY VI:
How will the country for these woful chances
Misthink the king and not be satisfied!

Son:
Was ever son so rued a father's death?

Father:
Was ever father so bemoan'd his son?

KING HENRY VI:
Was ever king so grieved for subjects' woe?
Much is your sorrow; mine ten times so much.

Son:
I'll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.

Father:
These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;
My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,
For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go;
My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thy father be,
Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
I'll bear thee hence; and let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.

KING HENRY VI:
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
Here sits a king more woful than you are.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Fly, father, fly! for all your friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like a chafed bull:
Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain:
Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
And bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands,
Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.

EXETER:
Away! for vengeance comes along with them:
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed;
Or else come after: I'll away before.

KING HENRY VI:
Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whither the queen intends. Forward; away!
3 KING HENRY VI

CLIFFORD:
Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies,
Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow
More than my body's parting with my soul!
My love and fear glued many friends to thee;
And, now I fall, thy tough commixture melts.
Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York,
The common people swarm like summer flies;
And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henry's enemies?
O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
That Phaethon should cheque thy fiery steeds,
Thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth!
And, Henry, hadst thou sway'd as kings should do,
Or as thy father and his father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like summer flies;
I and ten thousand in this luckless realm
Had left no mourning widows for our death;
And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds;
No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight:
The foe is merciless, and will not pity;
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest;
I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms, split my breast.

EDWARD:
Now breathe we, lords: good fortune bids us pause,
And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen,
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
As doth a sail, fill'd with a fretting gust,
Command an argosy to stem the waves.
But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?

WARWICK:
No, 'tis impossible he should escape,
For, though before his face I speak the words
Your brother Richard mark'd him for the grave:
And wheresoe'er he is, he's surely dead.

EDWARD:
Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?

RICHARD:
A deadly groan, like life and death's departing.

EDWARD:
See who it is: and, now the battle's ended,
If friend or foe, let him be gently used.

RICHARD:
Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford;
Who not contented that he lopp'd the branch
In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
But set his murdering knife unto the root
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princely father, Duke of York.

WARWICK:
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
Your father's head, which Clifford placed there;
Instead whereof let this supply the room:
Measure for measure must be answered.

EDWARD:
Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,
That nothing sung but death to us and ours:
Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.

WARWICK:
I think his understanding is bereft.
Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.

RICHARD:
O, would he did! and so perhaps he doth:
'Tis but his policy to counterfeit,
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our father.

GEORGE:
If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.

RICHARD:
Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.

EDWARD:
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.

WARWICK:
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.

GEORGE:
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.

RICHARD:
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.

EDWARD:
Thou pitied'st Rutland; I will pity thee.

GEORGE:
Where's Captain Margaret, to fence you now?

WARWICK:
They mock thee, Clifford: swear as thou wast wont.

RICHARD:
What, not an oath? nay, then the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
I know by that he's dead; and, by my soul,
If this right hand would buy two hour's life,
That I in all despite might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off, and with the
issuing blood
Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.

WARWICK:
Ay, but he's dead: off with the traitor's head,
And rear it in the place your father's stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned England's royal king:
From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen:
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together;
And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
The scatter'd foe that hopes to rise again;
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
First will I see the coronation;
And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea,
To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.

EDWARD:
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;
For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,
And George, of Clarence: Warwick, as ourself,
Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.

RICHARD:
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester;
For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.

WARWICK:
Tut, that's a foolish observation:
Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,
To see these honours in possession.
3 KING HENRY VI

First Keeper:
Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves;
For through this laund anon the deer will come;
And in this covert will we make our stand,
Culling the principal of all the deer.

Second Keeper:
I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.

First Keeper:
That cannot be; the noise of thy cross-bow
Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best:
And, for the time shall not seem tedious,
I'll tell thee what befell me on a day
In this self-place where now we mean to stand.

Second Keeper:
Here comes a man; let's stay till he be past.

KING HENRY VI:
From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love,
To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine;
Thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee,
Thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed:
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press to speak for right,
No, not a man comes for redress of thee;
For how can I help them, and not myself?

First Keeper:
Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee:
This is the quondam king; let's seize upon him.

KING HENRY VI:
Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,
For wise men say it is the wisest course.

Second Keeper:
Why linger we? let us lay hands upon him.

First Keeper:
Forbear awhile; we'll hear a little more.

KING HENRY VI:
My queen and son are gone to France for aid;
And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
Is thither gone, to crave the French king's sister
To wife for Edward: if this news be true,
Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost;
For Warwick is a subtle orator,
And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
By this account then Margaret may win him;
For she's a woman to be pitied much:
Her sighs will make a battery in his breast;
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart;
The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn;
And Nero will be tainted with remorse,
To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give;
She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry,
He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward.
She weeps, and says her Henry is deposed;
He smiles, and says his Edward is install'd;
That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more;
Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion wins the king from her,
With promise of his sister, and what else,
To strengthen and support King Edward's place.
O Margaret, thus 'twill be; and thou, poor soul,
Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!

Second Keeper:
Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?

KING HENRY VI:
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
A man at least, for less I should not be;
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?

Second Keeper:
Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.

KING HENRY VI:
Why, so I am, in mind; and that's enough.

Second Keeper:
But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?

KING HENRY VI:
My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,
Nor to be seen: my crown is called content:
A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.

Second Keeper:
Well, if you be a king crown'd with content,
Your crown content and you must be contented
To go along with us; for as we think,
You are the king King Edward hath deposed;
And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance
Will apprehend you as his enemy.

KING HENRY VI:
But did you never swear, and break an oath?

Second Keeper:
No, never such an oath; nor will not now.

KING HENRY VI:
Where did you dwell when I was King of England?

Second Keeper:
Here in this country, where we now remain.

KING HENRY VI:
I was anointed king at nine months old;
My father and my grandfather were kings,
And you were sworn true subjects unto me:
And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?

First Keeper:
No;
For we were subjects but while you were king.

KING HENRY VI:
Why, am I dead? do I not breathe a man?
Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear!
Look, as I blow this feather from my face,
And as the air blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust;
Such is the lightness of you common men.
But do not break your oaths; for of that sin
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the king shall be commanded;
And be you kings, command, and I'll obey.

First Keeper:
We are true subjects to the king, King Edward.

KING HENRY VI:
So would you be again to Henry,
If he were seated as King Edward is.

First Keeper:
We charge you, in God's name, and the king's,
To go with us unto the officers.

KING HENRY VI:
In God's name, lead; your king's name be obey'd:
And what God will, that let your king perform;
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Alban's field
This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
His lands then seized on by the conqueror:
Her suit is now to repossess those lands;
Which we in justice cannot well deny,
Because in quarrel of the house of York
The worthy gentleman did lose his life.

GLOUCESTER:
Your highness shall do well to grant her suit;
It were dishonour to deny it her.

KING EDWARD IV:
It were no less; but yet I'll make a pause.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Widow, we will consider of your suit;
And come some other time to know our mind.

LADY GREY:
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay:
May it please your highness to resolve me now;
And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
How many children hast thou, widow? tell me.

CLARENCE:

GLOUCESTER:

LADY GREY:
Three, my most gracious lord.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.

LADY GREY:
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.

KING EDWARD IV:
Lords, give us leave: I'll try this widow's wit.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?

LADY GREY:
Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.

KING EDWARD IV:
And would you not do much to do them good?

LADY GREY:
To do them good, I would sustain some harm.

KING EDWARD IV:
Then get your husband's lands, to do them good.

LADY GREY:
Therefore I came unto your majesty.

KING EDWARD IV:
I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.

LADY GREY:
So shall you bind me to your highness' service.

KING EDWARD IV:
What service wilt thou do me, if I give them?

LADY GREY:
What you command, that rests in me to do.

KING EDWARD IV:
But you will take exceptions to my boon.

LADY GREY:
No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.

LADY GREY:
Why, then I will do what your grace commands.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

LADY GREY:
Why stops my lord, shall I not hear my task?

KING EDWARD IV:
An easy task; 'tis but to love a king.

LADY GREY:
That's soon perform'd, because I am a subject.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.

LADY GREY:
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
But stay thee, 'tis the fruits of love I mean.

LADY GREY:
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get?

LADY GREY:
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;
That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.

KING EDWARD IV:
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.

LADY GREY:
Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.

KING EDWARD IV:
But now you partly may perceive my mind.

LADY GREY:
My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your highness aims at, if I aim aright.

KING EDWARD IV:
To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.

LADY GREY:
To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.

LADY GREY:
Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower;
For by that loss I will not purchase them.

KING EDWARD IV:
Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.

LADY GREY:
Herein your highness wrongs both them and me.
But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit:
Please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, if thou wilt say 'ay' to my request;
No if thou dost say 'no' to my demand.

LADY GREY:
Then, no, my lord. My suit is at an end.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

KING EDWARD IV:

LADY GREY:
'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord:
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a sovereign.

KING EDWARD IV:
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
I speak no more than what my soul intends;
And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.

LADY GREY:
And that is more than I will yield unto:
I know I am too mean to be your queen,
And yet too good to be your concubine.

KING EDWARD IV:
You cavil, widow: I did mean, my queen.

LADY GREY:
'Twill grieve your grace my sons should call you father.

KING EDWARD IV:
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children;
And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor,
Have other some: why, 'tis a happy thing
To be the father unto many sons.
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

KING EDWARD IV:
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.

GLOUCESTER:
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.

KING EDWARD IV:
You'll think it strange if I should marry her.

CLARENCE:
To whom, my lord?

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, Clarence, to myself.

GLOUCESTER:
That would be ten days' wonder at the least.

CLARENCE:
That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.

GLOUCESTER:
By so much is the wonder in extremes.

KING EDWARD IV:
Well, jest on, brothers: I can tell you both
Her suit is granted for her husband's lands.

Nobleman:
My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken,
And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.

KING EDWARD IV:
See that he be convey'd unto the Tower:
And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.
Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably.

GLOUCESTER:
Ay, Edward will use women honourably.
Would he were wasted, marrow, bones and all,
That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring,
To cross me from the golden time I look for!
And yet, between my soul's desire and me--
The lustful Edward's title buried--
Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward,
And all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies,
To take their rooms, ere I can place myself:
A cold premeditation for my purpose!
Why, then, I do but dream on sovereignty;
Like one that stands upon a promontory,
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying, he'll lade it dry to have his way:
So do I wish the crown, being so far off;
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it;
And so I say, I'll cut the causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities.
My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,
Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard;
What other pleasure can the world afford?
I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap,
And deck my body in gay ornaments,
And witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
O miserable thought! and more unlikely
Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns!
Why, love forswore me in my mother's womb:
And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe,
To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub;
To make an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits deformity to mock my body;
To shape my legs of an unequal size;
To disproportion me in every part,
Like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bear-whelp
That carries no impression like the dam.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
O monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought!
Then, since this earth affords no joy to me,
But to command, to cheque, to o'erbear such
As are of better person than myself,
I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
And, whiles I live, to account this world but hell,
Until my mis-shaped trunk that bears this head
Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And yet I know not how to get the crown,
For many lives stand between me and home:
And I,--like one lost in a thorny wood,
That rends the thorns and is rent with the thorns,
Seeking a way and straying from the way;
Not knowing how to find the open air,
But toiling desperately to find it out,--
Torment myself to catch the English crown:
And from that torment I will free myself,
Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,
And frame my face to all occasions.
I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall;
I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk;
I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slily than Ulysses could,
And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
I can add colours to the chameleon,
Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,
And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?
Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING LEWIS XI:
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us: it ill befits thy state
And birth, that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.

QUEEN MARGARET:
No, mighty King of France: now Margaret
Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve
Where kings command. I was, I must confess,
Great Albion's queen in former golden days:
But now mischance hath trod my title down,
And with dishonour laid me on the ground;
Where I must take like seat unto my fortune,
And to my humble seat conform myself.

KING LEWIS XI:
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?

QUEEN MARGARET:
From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.

KING LEWIS XI:
Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,
And sit thee by our side:
Yield not thy neck
To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
Still ride in triumph over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief;
It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis,
That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
Is of a king become a banish'd man,
And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn;
While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York
Usurps the regal title and the seat
Of England's true-anointed lawful king.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done:
Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help;
Our people and our peers are both misled,
Our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight,
And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.

KING LEWIS XI:
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm,
While we bethink a means to break it off.

QUEEN MARGARET:
The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.

KING LEWIS XI:
The more I stay, the more I'll succor thee.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!

KING LEWIS XI:
What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.

KING LEWIS XI:
Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, now begins a second storm to rise;
For this is he that moves both wind and tide.

WARWICK:
From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend,
I come, in kindness and unfeigned love,
First, to do greetings to thy royal person;
And then to crave a league of amity;
And lastly, to confirm that amity
With a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
To England's king in lawful marriage.

QUEEN MARGARET:

WARWICK:

QUEEN MARGARET:
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak,
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,
But from deceit bred by necessity;
For how can tyrants safely govern home,
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,
That Henry liveth still: but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.
Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour;
For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.

WARWICK:
Injurious Margaret!

PRINCE EDWARD:
And why not queen?

WARWICK:
Because thy father Henry did usurp;
And thou no more are prince than she is queen.

OXFORD:
Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his prowess conquered all France:
From these our Henry lineally descends.

WARWICK:
Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse,
You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost
All that which Henry Fifth had gotten?
Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
But for the rest, you tell a pedigree
Of threescore and two years; a silly time
To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.

OXFORD:
Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy treason with a blush?

WARWICK:
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
For shame! leave Henry, and call Edward king.

OXFORD:
Call him my king by whose injurious doom
My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
Was done to death? and more than so, my father,
Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years,
When nature brought him to the door of death?
No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm,
This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.

WARWICK:
And I the house of York.

KING LEWIS XI:
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside,
While I use further conference with Warwick.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him not!

KING LEWIS XI:
Now Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
Is Edward your true king? for I were loath
To link with him that were not lawful chosen.

WARWICK:
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.

KING LEWIS XI:
But is he gracious in the people's eye?

WARWICK:
The more that Henry was unfortunate.

KING LEWIS XI:
Then further, all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth the measure of his love
Unto our sister Bona.

WARWICK:
Such it seems
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
Myself have often heard him say and swear
That this his love was an eternal plant,
Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground,
The leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun,
Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.

KING LEWIS XI:
Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.

BONA:
Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine:
Yet I confess that often ere this day,
When I have heard your king's desert recounted,
Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.

KING LEWIS XI:
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's;
And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
Touching the jointure that your king must make,
Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
That Bona shall be wife to the English king.

PRINCE EDWARD:
To Edward, but not to the English king.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Deceitful Warwick! it was thy device
By this alliance to make void my suit:
Before thy coming Lewis was Henry's friend.

KING LEWIS XI:
And still is friend to him and Margaret:
But if your title to the crown be weak,
As may appear by Edward's good success,
Then 'tis but reason that I be released
From giving aid which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
That your estate requires and mine can yield.

WARWICK:
Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,
Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.
And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
You have a father able to maintain you;
And better 'twere you troubled him than France.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick, peace,
Proud setter up and puller down of kings!
I will not hence, till, with my talk and tears,
Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love;
For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.

KING LEWIS XI:
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.

Post:

OXFORD:
I like it well that our fair queen and mistress
Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Nay, mark how Lewis stamps, as he were nettled:
I hope all's for the best.

KING LEWIS XI:
Warwick, what are thy news? and yours, fair queen?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.

WARWICK:
Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.

KING LEWIS XI:
What! has your king married the Lady Grey!
And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
Is this the alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?

QUEEN MARGARET:
I told your majesty as much before:
This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.

WARWICK:
King Lewis, I here protest, in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's,
No more my king, for he dishonours me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget that by the house of York
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece?
Did I impale him with the regal crown?
Did I put Henry from his native right?
And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame?
Shame on himself! for my desert is honour:
And to repair my honour lost for him,
I here renounce him and return to Henry.
My noble queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth I am thy true servitor:
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,
And replant Henry in his former state.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love;
And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou becomest King Henry's friend.

WARWICK:
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,
That, if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
I'll undertake to land them on our coast
And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
'Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him:
And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
He's very likely now to fall from him,
For matching more for wanton lust than honour,
Or than for strength and safety of our country.

BONA:
Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged
But by thy help to this distressed queen?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live,
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?

BONA:
My quarrel and this English queen's are one.

WARWICK:
And mine, fair lady Bona, joins with yours.

KING LEWIS XI:
And mine with hers, and thine, and Margaret's.
Therefore at last I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Let me give humble thanks for all at once.

KING LEWIS XI:
Then, England's messenger, return in post,
And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride:
Thou seest what's past, go fear thy king withal.

BONA:
Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,
And I am ready to put armour on.

WARWICK:
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.
There's thy reward: be gone.

KING LEWIS XI:
But, Warwick,
Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men,
Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle;
And, as occasion serves, this noble queen
And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt,
What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?

WARWICK:
This shall assure my constant loyalty,
That if our queen and this young prince agree,
I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy
To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous,
Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick;
And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it;
And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.

KING LEWIS XI:
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral,
Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet.
I long till Edward fall by war's mischance,
For mocking marriage with a dame of France.

WARWICK:
I came from Edward as ambassador,
But I return his sworn and mortal foe:
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
I was the chief that raised him to the crown,
And I'll be chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.
3 KING HENRY VI

GLOUCESTER:
Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?

CLARENCE:
Alas, you know, 'tis far from hence to France;
How could he stay till Warwick made return?

SOMERSET:
My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the king.

GLOUCESTER:
And his well-chosen bride.

CLARENCE:
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,
That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?

CLARENCE:
As well as Lewis of France, or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
That they'll take no offence at our abuse.

KING EDWARD IV:
Suppose they take offence without a cause,
They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward,
Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will.

GLOUCESTER:
And shall have your will, because our king:
Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.

KING EDWARD IV:
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?

GLOUCESTER:
Not I:
No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd
Whom God hath join'd together; ay, and 'twere pity
To sunder them that yoke so well together.

KING EDWARD IV:
Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
Should not become my wife and England's queen.
And you too, Somerset and Montague,
Speak freely what you think.

CLARENCE:
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy, for mocking him
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.

GLOUCESTER:
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.

KING EDWARD IV:
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased
By such invention as I can devise?

MONTAGUE:
Yet, to have join'd with France in such alliance
Would more have strengthen'd this our commonwealth
'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.

HASTINGS:
Why, knows not Montague that of itself
England is safe, if true within itself?

MONTAGUE:
But the safer when 'tis back'd with France.

HASTINGS:
'Tis better using France than trusting France:
Let us be back'd with God and with the seas
Which He hath given for fence impregnable,
And with their helps only defend ourselves;
In them and in ourselves our safety lies.

CLARENCE:
For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, what of that? it was my will and grant;
And for this once my will shall stand for law.

GLOUCESTER:
And yet methinks your grace hath not done well,
To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the brother of your loving bride;
She better would have fitted me or Clarence:
But in your bride you bury brotherhood.

CLARENCE:
Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.

KING EDWARD IV:
Alas, poor Clarence! is it for a wife
That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.

CLARENCE:
In choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment,
Which being shallow, you give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf;
And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.

KING EDWARD IV:
Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be king,
And not be tied unto his brother's will.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My lords, before it pleased his majesty
To raise my state to title of a queen,
Do me but right, and you must all confess
That I was not ignoble of descent;
And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
But as this title honours me and mine,
So your dislike, to whom I would be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.

KING EDWARD IV:
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns:
What danger or what sorrow can befall thee,
So long as Edward is thy constant friend,
And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, messenger, what letters or what news
From France?

Post:
My sovereign liege, no letters; and few words,
But such as I, without your special pardon,
Dare not relate.

KING EDWARD IV:
Go to, we pardon thee: therefore, in brief,
Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?

Post:
At my depart, these were his very words:
'Go tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Is Lewis so brave? belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?

Post:
These were her words, utter'd with mad disdain:
'Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.'

KING EDWARD IV:
I blame not her, she could say little less;
She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen?
For I have heard that she was there in place.

Post:
'Tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done,
And I am ready to put armour on.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?

Post:
He, more incensed against your majesty
Than all the rest, discharged me with these words:
'Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
Well I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd:
They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?

Post:
Ay, gracious sovereign; they are so link'd in
friendship
That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter.

CLARENCE:
Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter;
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
I may not prove inferior to yourself.
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick!
Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen;
And haste is needful in this desperate case.
Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men, and make prepare for war;
They are already, or quickly will be landed:
Myself in person will straight follow you.
But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance:
Tell me if you love Warwick more than me?
If it be so, then both depart to him;
I rather wish you foes than hollow friends:
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.

MONTAGUE:
So God help Montague as he proves true!

HASTINGS:
And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause!

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?

GLOUCESTER:
Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, so! then am I sure of victory.
Now therefore let us hence; and lose no hour,
Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well;
The common people by numbers swarm to us.
But see where Somerset and Clarence come!
Speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends?

CLARENCE:
Fear not that, my lord.

WARWICK:
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick;
And welcome, Somerset: I hold it cowardice
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
Hath pawn'd an open hand in sign of love;
Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings:
But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be thine.
And now what rests but, in night's coverture,
Thy brother being carelessly encamp'd,
His soldiers lurking in the towns about,
And but attended by a simple guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy:
That as Ulysses and stout Diomede
With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus' tents,
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
So we, well cover'd with the night's black mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edward's guard
And seize himself; I say not, slaughter him,
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
Why, then, let's on our way in silent sort:
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!
3 KING HENRY VI

First Watchman:
Come on, my masters, each man take his stand:
The king by this is set him down to sleep.

Second Watchman:
What, will he not to bed?

First Watchman:
Why, no; for he hath made a solemn vow
Never to lie and take his natural rest
Till Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.

Second Watchman:
To-morrow then belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.

Third Watchman:
But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
That with the king here resteth in his tent?

First Watchman:
'Tis the Lord Hastings, the king's chiefest friend.

Third Watchman:
O, is it so? But why commands the king
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?

Second Watchman:
'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.

Third Watchman:
Ay, but give me worship and quietness;
I like it better than a dangerous honour.
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.

First Watchman:
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.

Second Watchman:
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent,
But to defend his person from night-foes?

WARWICK:
This is his tent; and see where stand his guard.
Courage, my masters! honour now or never!
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.

First Watchman:
Who goes there?

Second Watchman:
Stay, or thou diest!

SOMERSET:
What are they that fly there?

WARWICK:
Richard and Hastings: let them go; here is The duke.

KING EDWARD IV:
The duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted,
Thou call'dst me king.

WARWICK:
Ay, but the case is alter'd:
When you disgraced me in my embassade,
Then I degraded you from being king,
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas! how should you govern any kingdom,
That know not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one wife,
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
Nor how to study for the people's welfare,
Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?

KING EDWARD IV:
Yea, brother of Clarence, are thou here too?
Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,
Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
Edward will always bear himself as king:
Though fortune's malice overthrow my state,
My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.

WARWICK:
Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king:
But Henry now shall wear the English crown,
And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.
My Lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be convey'd
Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
I'll follow you, and tell what answer
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
Now, for a while farewell, good Duke of York.

KING EDWARD IV:
What fates impose, that men must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.

OXFORD:
What now remains, my lords, for us to do
But march to London with our soldiers?

WARWICK:
Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do;
To free King Henry from imprisonment
And see him seated in the regal throne.
3 KING HENRY VI

RIVERS:
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Why brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befall'n King Edward?

RIVERS:
What! loss of some pitch'd battle against Warwick?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
No, but the loss of his own royal person.

RIVERS:
Then is my sovereign slain?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard
Or by his foe surprised at unawares:
And, as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwick's brother and by that our foe.

RIVERS:
These news I must confess are full of grief;
Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may:
Warwick may lose, that now hath won the day.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Till then fair hope must hinder life's decay.
And I the rather wean me from despair
For love of Edward's offspring in my womb:
This is it that makes me bridle passion
And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross;
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
King Edward's fruit, true heir to the English crown.

RIVERS:
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I am inform'd that he comes towards London,
To set the crown once more on Henry's head:
Guess thou the rest; King Edward's friends must down,
But, to prevent the tyrant's violence,--
For trust not him that hath once broken faith,--
I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary,
To save at least the heir of Edward's right:
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly:
If Warwick take us we are sure to die.
3 KING HENRY VI

GLOUCESTER:
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither,
Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
Thus stands the case: you know our king, my brother,
Is prisoner to the bishop here, at whose hands
He hath good usage and great liberty,
And, often but attended with weak guard,
Comes hunting this way to disport himself.
I have advertised him by secret means
That if about this hour he make his way
Under the colour of his usual game,
He shall here find his friends with horse and men
To set him free from his captivity.

Huntsman:
This way, my lord; for this way lies the game.

KING EDWARD IV:
Nay, this way, man: see where the huntsmen stand.
Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Stand you thus close, to steal the bishop's deer?

GLOUCESTER:
Brother, the time and case requireth haste:
Your horse stands ready at the park-corner.

KING EDWARD IV:
But whither shall we then?

HASTINGS:
To Lynn, my lord,
And ship from thence to Flanders.

GLOUCESTER:
Well guess'd, believe me; for that was my meaning.

KING EDWARD IV:
Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.

GLOUCESTER:
But wherefore stay we? 'tis no time to talk.

KING EDWARD IV:
Huntsman, what say'st thou? wilt thou go along?

Huntsman:
Better do so than tarry and be hang'd.

GLOUCESTER:
Come then, away; let's ha' no more ado.

KING EDWARD IV:
Bishop, farewell: shield thee from Warwick's frown;
And pray that I may repossess the crown.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING HENRY VI:
Master lieutenant, now that God and friends
Have shaken Edward from the regal seat,
And turn'd my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees?

Lieutenant:
Subjects may challenge nothing of their sovereigns;
But if an humble prayer may prevail,
I then crave pardon of your majesty.

KING HENRY VI:
For what, lieutenant? for well using me?
Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness,
For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure;
Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds
Conceive when after many moody thoughts
At last by notes of household harmony
They quite forget their loss of liberty.
But, Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free,
And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee;
He was the author, thou the instrument.
Therefore, that I may conquer fortune's spite
By living low, where fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed land
May not be punish'd with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
I here resign my government to thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.

WARWICK:
Your grace hath still been famed for virtuous;
And now may seem as wise as virtuous,
By spying and avoiding fortune's malice,
For few men rightly temper with the stars:
Yet in this one thing let me blame your grace,
For choosing me when Clarence is in place.

CLARENCE:
No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the heavens in thy nativity
Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown,
As likely to be blest in peace and war;
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.

WARWICK:
And I choose Clarence only for protector.

KING HENRY VI:
Warwick and Clarence give me both your hands:
Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts,
That no dissension hinder government:
I make you both protectors of this land,
While I myself will lead a private life
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise.

WARWICK:
What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?

CLARENCE:
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent;
For on thy fortune I repose myself.

WARWICK:
Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content:
We'll yoke together, like a double shadow
To Henry's body, and supply his place;
I mean, in bearing weight of government,
While he enjoys the honour and his ease.
And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor,
And all his lands and goods be confiscate.

CLARENCE:
What else? and that succession be determined.

WARWICK:
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.

KING HENRY VI:
But, with the first of all your chief affairs,
Let me entreat, for I command no more,
That Margaret your queen and my son Edward
Be sent for, to return from France with speed;
For, till I see them here, by doubtful fear
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.

CLARENCE:
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.

KING HENRY VI:
My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that,
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?

SOMERSET:
My liege, it is young Henry, earl of Richmond.

KING HENRY VI:
Come hither, England's hope.
If secret powers
Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.
His looks are full of peaceful majesty,
His head by nature framed to wear a crown,
His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself
Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
Make much of him, my lords, for this is he
Must help you more than you are hurt by me.

WARWICK:
What news, my friend?

Post:
That Edward is escaped from your brother,
And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.

WARWICK:
Unsavoury news! but how made he escape?

Post:
He was convey'd by Richard Duke of Gloucester
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush on the forest side
And from the bishop's huntsmen rescued him;
For hunting was his daily exercise.

WARWICK:
My brother was too careless of his charge.
But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore that may betide.

SOMERSET:
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's;
For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more wars before 't be long.
As Henry's late presaging prophecy
Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond,
So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts
What may befall him, to his harm and ours:
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany,
Till storms be past of civil enmity.

OXFORD:
Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.

SOMERSET:
It shall be so; he shall to Brittany.
Come, therefore, let's about it speedily.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Yet thus far fortune maketh us amends,
And says that once more I shall interchange
My waned state for Henry's regal crown.
Well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas
And brought desired help from Burgundy:
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
But that we enter, as into our dukedom?

GLOUCESTER:
The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this;
For many men that stumble at the threshold
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.

KING EDWARD IV:
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us:
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to us.

HASTINGS:
My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.

Mayor:
My lords, we were forewarned of your coming,
And shut the gates for safety of ourselves;
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.

KING EDWARD IV:
But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,
Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.

Mayor:
True, my good lord; I know you for no less.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.

GLOUCESTER:

HASTINGS:
Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the gates; we are King Henry's friends.

Mayor:
Ay, say you so? the gates shall then be open'd.

GLOUCESTER:
A wise stout captain, and soon persuaded!

HASTINGS:
The good old man would fain that all were well,
So 'twere not 'long of him; but being enter'd,
I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
Both him and all his brothers unto reason.

KING EDWARD IV:
So, master mayor: these gates must not be shut
But in the night or in the time of war.
What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys;
For Edward will defend the town and thee,
And all those friends that deign to follow me.

GLOUCESTER:
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.

KING EDWARD IV:
Welcome, Sir John! But why come you in arms?

MONTAGUE:
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal subject ought to do.

KING EDWARD IV:
Thanks, good Montgomery; but we now forget
Our title to the crown and only claim
Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.

MONTAGUE:
Then fare you well, for I will hence again:
I came to serve a king and not a duke.
Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.

KING EDWARD IV:
Nay, stay, Sir John, awhile, and we'll debate
By what safe means the crown may be recover'd.

MONTAGUE:
What talk you of debating? in few words,
If you'll not here proclaim yourself our king,
I'll leave you to your fortune and be gone
To keep them back that come to succor you:
Why shall we fight, if you pretend no title?

GLOUCESTER:
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?

KING EDWARD IV:
When we grow stronger, then we'll make our claim:
Till then, 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.

HASTINGS:
Away with scrupulous wit! now arms must rule.

GLOUCESTER:
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand:
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.

KING EDWARD IV:
Then be it as you will; for 'tis my right,
And Henry but usurps the diadem.

MONTAGUE:
Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself;
And now will I be Edward's champion.

HASTINGS:
Sound trumpet; Edward shall be here proclaim'd:
Come, fellow-soldier, make thou proclamation.

Soldier:
Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God, king of
England and France, and lord of Ireland, &c.

MONTAGUE:
And whosoe'er gainsays King Edward's right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.

All:
Long live Edward the Fourth!

KING EDWARD IV:
Thanks, brave Montgomery; and thanks unto you all:
If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.
Now, for this night, let's harbour here in York;
And when the morning sun shall raise his car
Above the border of this horizon,
We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates;
For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
Ah, froward Clarence! how evil it beseems thee
To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on, brave soldiers: doubt not of the day,
And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas,
And with his troops doth march amain to London;
And many giddy people flock to him.

KING HENRY VI:
Let's levy men, and beat him back again.

CLARENCE:
A little fire is quickly trodden out;
Which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.

WARWICK:
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war;
Those will I muster up: and thou, son Clarence,
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
The knights and gentlemen to come with thee:
Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
Northampton and in Leicestershire, shalt find
Men well inclined to hear what thou command'st:
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.
My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
Like to his island girt in with the ocean,
Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.
Farewell, my sovereign.

KING HENRY VI:
Farewell, my Hector, and my Troy's true hope.

CLARENCE:
In sign of truth, I kiss your highness' hand.

KING HENRY VI:
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate!

MONTAGUE:
Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.

OXFORD:
And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.

KING HENRY VI:
Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague,
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.

WARWICK:
Farewell, sweet lords: let's meet at Coventry.

KING HENRY VI:
Here at the palace I will rest awhile.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship?
Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
Should not be able to encounter mine.

EXETER:
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.

KING HENRY VI:
That's not my fear; my meed hath got me fame:
I have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suits with slow delays;
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears;
I have not been desirous of their wealth,
Nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies.
Nor forward of revenge, though they much err'd:
Then why should they love Edward more than me?
No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace:
And when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
The lamb will never cease to follow him.

EXETER:
Hark, hark, my lord! what shouts are these?

KING EDWARD IV:
Seize on the shame-faced Henry, bear him hence;
And once again proclaim us King of England.
You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow:
Now stops thy spring; my sea sha$l suck them dry,
And swell so much the higher by their ebb.
Hence with him to the Tower; let him not speak.
And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course
Where peremptory Warwick now remains:
The sun shines hot; and, if we use delay,
Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.

GLOUCESTER:
Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-grown traitor unawares:
Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?

First Messenger:
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.

WARWICK:
How far off is our brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?

Second Messenger:
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.

WARWICK:
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?

SOMERSET:
At Southam I did leave him with his forces,
And do expect him here some two hours hence.

WARWICK:
Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his drum.

SOMERSET:
It is not his, my lord; here Southam lies:
The drum your honour hears marcheth from Warwick.

WARWICK:
Who should that be? belike, unlook'd-for friends.

SOMERSET:
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.

KING EDWARD IV:
Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.

GLOUCESTER:
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall!

WARWICK:
O unbid spite! is sportful Edward come?
Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair?

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
Speak gentle words and humbly bend thy knee,
Call Edward king and at his hands beg mercy?
And he shall pardon thee these outrages.

WARWICK:
Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee own,
Call Warwick patron and be penitent?
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.

GLOUCESTER:
I thought, at least, he would have said the king;
Or did he make the jest against his will?

WARWICK:
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?

GLOUCESTER:
Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give:
I'll do thee service for so good a gift.

WARWICK:
'Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why then 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.

WARWICK:
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight:
And weakling, Warwick takes his gift again;
And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.

KING EDWARD IV:
But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner:
And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
What is the body when the head is off?

GLOUCESTER:
Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
The king was slily finger'd from the deck!
You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
And, ten to one, you'll meet him in the Tower.

EDWARD:
'Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.

GLOUCESTER:
Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel down:
Nay, when? strike now, or else the iron cools.

WARWICK:
I had rather chop this hand off at a blow,
And with the other fling it at thy face,
Than bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.

KING EDWARD IV:
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair
Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood,
'Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.'

WARWICK:
O cheerful colours! see where Oxford comes!

OXFORD:
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster!

GLOUCESTER:
The gates are open, let us enter too.

KING EDWARD IV:
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array; for they no doubt
Will issue out again and bid us battle:
If not, the city being but of small defence,
We'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.

WARWICK:
O, welcome, Oxford! for we want thy help.

MONTAGUE:
Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!

GLOUCESTER:
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.

KING EDWARD IV:
The harder match'd, the greater victory:
My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.

SOMERSET:
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!

GLOUCESTER:
Two of thy name, both Dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York;
And thou shalt be the third if this sword hold.

WARWICK:
And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid his brother battle;
With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
More than the nature of a brother's love!
Come, Clarence, come; thou wilt, if Warwick call.

CLARENCE:
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee
I will not ruinate my father's house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why, trow'st thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Against his brother and his lawful king?
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath:
To keep that oath were more impiety
Than Jephthah's, when he sacrificed his daughter.
I am so sorry for my trespass made
That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe,
With resolution, wheresoe'er I meet thee--
As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad--
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends:
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.

KING EDWARD IV:
Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.

GLOUCESTER:
Welcome, good Clarence; this is brotherlike.

WARWICK:
O passing traitor, perjured and unjust!

KING EDWARD IV:
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?

WARWICK:
Alas, I am not coop'd here for defence!
I will away towards Barnet presently,
And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou darest.

KING EDWARD IV:
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.
Lords, to the field; Saint George and victory!
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
So, lie thou there: die thou, and die our fear;
For Warwick was a bug that fear'd us all.
Now, Montague, sit fast; I seek for thee,
That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.

WARWICK:
Ah, who is nigh? come to me, friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? my mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows.
That I must yield my body to the earth
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Whose top-branch overpeer'd Jove's spreading tree
And kept low shrubs from winter's powerful wind.
These eyes, that now are dimm'd with death's black veil,
Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun,
To search the secret treasons of the world:
The wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood,
Were liken'd oft to kingly sepulchres;
For who lived king, but I could dig his grave?
And who durst mine when Warwick bent his brow?
Lo, now my glory smear'd in dust and blood!
My parks, my walks, my manors that I had.
Even now forsake me, and of all my lands
Is nothing left me but my body's length.
Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
And, live we how we can, yet die we must.

SOMERSET:
Ah, Warwick, Warwick! wert thou as we are.
We might recover all our loss again;
The queen from France hath brought a puissant power:
Even now we heard the news: ah, could'st thou fly!

WARWICK:
Why, then I would not fly. Ah, Montague,
If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand.
And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile!
Thou lovest me not; for, brother, if thou didst,
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
That glues my lips and will not let me speak.
Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.

SOMERSET:
Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breathed his last;
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.'
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a clamour in a vault,
That mought not be distinguished; but at last
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
'O, farewell, Warwick!'

WARWICK:
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves;
For Warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.

OXFORD:
Away, away, to meet the queen's great power!
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
But, in the midst of this bright-shining day,
I spy a black, suspicious, threatening cloud,
That will encounter with our glorious sun,
Ere he attain his easeful western bed:
I mean, my lords, those powers that the queen
Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast
And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.

CLARENCE:
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
And blow it to the source from whence it came:
The very beams will dry those vapours up,
For every cloud engenders not a storm.

GLOUCESTER:
The queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford fled to her:
If she have time to breathe be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.

KING EDWARD IV:
We are advertised by our loving friends
That they do hold their course toward Tewksbury:
We, having now the best at Barnet field,
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way;
And, as we march, our strength will be augmented
In every county as we go along.
Strike up the drum; cry 'Courage!' and away.
3 KING HENRY VI

QUEEN MARGARET:
Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss,
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
And half our sailors swallow'd in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still. Is't meet that he
Should leave the helm and like a fearful lad
With tearful eyes add water to the sea
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock,
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Ah, what a shame! ah, what a fault were this!
Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?
And Montague our topmost; what of him?
Our slaughter'd friends the tackles; what of these?
Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
And Somerset another goodly mast?
The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I
For once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge?
We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck.
As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
And what is Edward but ruthless sea?
What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
And Richard but a ragged fatal rock?
All these the enemies to our poor bark.
Say you can swim; alas, 'tis but a while!
Tread on the sand; why, there you quickly sink:
Bestride the rock; the tide will wash you off,
Or else you famish; that's a threefold death.
This speak I, lords, to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from us,
That there's no hoped-for mercy with the brothers
More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.
Why, courage then! what cannot be avoided
'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
Should, if a coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his breast with magnanimity
And make him, naked, foil a man at arms.
I speak not this as doubting any here
For did I but suspect a fearful man
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Lest in our need he might infect another
And make him of like spirit to himself.
If any such be here--as God forbid!--
Let him depart before we need his help.

OXFORD:
Women and children of so high a courage,
And warriors faint! why, 'twere perpetual shame.
O brave young prince! thy famous grandfather
Doth live again in thee: long mayst thou live
To bear his image and renew his glories!

SOMERSET:
And he that will not fight for such a hope.
Go home to bed, and like the owl by day,
If he arise, be mock'd and wonder'd at.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thanks, gentle Somerset; sweet Oxford, thanks.

PRINCE EDWARD:
And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.

Messenger:
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand.
Ready to fight; therefore be resolute.

OXFORD:
I thought no less: it is his policy
To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.

SOMERSET:
But he's deceived; we are in readiness.

QUEEN MARGARET:
This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.

OXFORD:
Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.

KING EDWARD IV:
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood,
Which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength,
Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
For well I wot ye blaze to burn them out
Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
My tears gainsay; for every word I speak,
Ye see, I drink the water of mine eyes.
Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
Is prisoner to the foe; his state usurp'd,
His realm a slaughter-house, his subjects slain,
His statutes cancell'd and his treasure spent;
And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
You fight in justice: then, in God's name, lords,
Be valiant and give signal to the fight.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight:
For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
Go, bear them hence; I will not hear them speak.

OXFORD:
For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.

SOMERSET:
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.

QUEEN MARGARET:
So part we sadly in this troublous world,
To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.

KING EDWARD IV:
Is proclamation made, that who finds Edward
Shall have a high reward, and he his life?

GLOUCESTER:
It is: and lo, where youthful Edward comes!

KING EDWARD IV:
Bring forth the gallant, let us hear him speak.
What! can so young a thorn begin to prick?
Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
And all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?

PRINCE EDWARD:
Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York!
Suppose that I am now my father's mouth;
Resign thy chair, and where I stand kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee,
Which traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!

GLOUCESTER:
That you might still have worn the petticoat,
And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Let AEsop fable in a winter's night;
His currish riddles sort not with this place.

GLOUCESTER:
By heaven, brat, I'll plague ye for that word.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.

GLOUCESTER:
For God's sake, take away this captive scold.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.

KING EDWARD IV:
Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.

CLARENCE:
Untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.

PRINCE EDWARD:
I know my duty; you are all undutiful:
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou mis-shapen Dick, I tell ye all
I am your better, traitors as ye are:
And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.

KING EDWARD IV:
Take that, thou likeness of this railer here.

GLOUCESTER:
Sprawl'st thou? take that, to end thy agony.

CLARENCE:
And there's for twitting me with perjury.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O, kill me too!

GLOUCESTER:
Marry, and shall.

KING EDWARD IV:
Hold, Richard, hold; for we have done too much.

GLOUCESTER:
Why should she live, to fill the world with words?

KING EDWARD IV:
What, doth she swoon? use means for her recovery.

GLOUCESTER:
Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother;
I'll hence to London on a serious matter:
Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.

CLARENCE:
What? what?

GLOUCESTER:
The Tower, the Tower.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O Ned, sweet Ned! speak to thy mother, boy!
Canst thou not speak? O traitors! murderers!
They that stabb'd Caesar shed no blood at all,
Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
If this foul deed were by to equal it:
He was a man; this, in respect, a child:
And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
What's worse than murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst, and if I speak:
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and villains! bloody cannibals!
How sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd!
You have no children, butchers! if you had,
The thought of them would have stirr'd up remorse:
But if you ever chance to have a child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off
As, deathmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!

KING EDWARD IV:
Away with her; go, bear her hence perforce.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here,
Here sheathe thy sword, I'll pardon thee my death:
What, wilt thou not? then, Clarence, do it thou.

CLARENCE:
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Good Clarence, do; sweet Clarence, do thou do it.

CLARENCE:
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself:
'Twas sin before, but now 'tis charity.
What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher,
Hard-favour'd Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here: murder is thy alms-deed;
Petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back.

KING EDWARD IV:
Away, I say; I charge ye, bear her hence.

QUEEN MARGARET:
So come to you and yours, as to this Prince!

KING EDWARD IV:
Where's Richard gone?

CLARENCE:
To London, all in post; and, as I guess,
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.

KING EDWARD IV:
He's sudden, if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence: discharge the common sort
With pay and thanks, and let's away to London
And see our gentle queen how well she fares:
By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.
3 KING HENRY VI

GLOUCESTER:
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?

KING HENRY VI:
Ay, my good lord:--my lord, I should say rather;
'Tis sin to flatter; 'good' was little better:
'Good Gloucester' and 'good devil' were alike,
And both preposterous; therefore, not 'good lord.'

GLOUCESTER:
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves: we must confer.

KING HENRY VI:
So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;
So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece
And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?

GLOUCESTER:
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.

KING HENRY VI:
The bird that hath been limed in a bush,
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
Have now the fatal object in my eye
Where my poor young was limed, was caught and kill'd.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete,
That taught his son the office of a fowl!
An yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.

KING HENRY VI:
I, Daedalus; my poor boy, Icarus;
Thy father, Minos, that denied our course;
The sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy
Thy brother Edward, and thyself the sea
Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
My breast can better brook thy dagger's point
Than can my ears that tragic history.
But wherefore dost thou come? is't for my life?

GLOUCESTER:
Think'st thou I am an executioner?

KING HENRY VI:
A persecutor, I am sure, thou art:
If murdering innocents be executing,
Why, then thou art an executioner.

GLOUCESTER:
Thy son I kill'd for his presumption.

KING HENRY VI:
Hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
And thus I prophesy, that many a thousand,
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old man's sigh and many a widow's,
And many an orphan's water-standing eye--
Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
And orphans for their parents timeless death--
Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
The owl shriek'd at thy birth,--an evil sign;
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time;
Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees;
The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,
And chattering pies in dismal discords sung.
Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
And, yet brought forth less than a mother's hope,
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
To signify thou camest to bite the world:
And, if the rest be true which I have heard,
Thou camest--

GLOUCESTER:
I'll hear no more: die, prophet in thy speech:
For this amongst the rest, was I ordain'd.

KING HENRY VI:
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
God forgive my sins, and pardon thee!

GLOUCESTER:
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor king's death!
O, may such purple tears be alway shed
From those that wish the downfall of our house!
If any spark of life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell; and say I sent thee thither:
I, that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of;
For I have often heard my mother say
I came into the world with my legs forward:
Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste,
And seek their ruin that usurp'd our right?
The midwife wonder'd and the women cried
'O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!'
And so I was; which plainly signified
That I should snarl and bite and play the dog.
Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.
I have no brother, I am like no brother;
And this word 'love,' which graybeards call divine,
Be resident in men like one another
And not in me: I am myself alone.
Clarence, beware; thou keep'st me from the light:
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
For I will buz abroad such prophecies
That Edward shall be fearful of his life,
And then, to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.
King Henry and the prince his son are gone:
Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting myself but bad till I be best.
I'll throw thy body in another room
And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Once more we sit in England's royal throne,
Re-purchased with the blood of enemies.
What valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn,
Have we mow'd down, in tops of all their pride!
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renown'd
For hardy and undoubted champions;
Two Cliffords, as the father and the son,
And two Northumberlands; two braver men
Ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound;
With them, the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,
That in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion
And made the forest tremble when they roar'd.
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
And made our footstool of security.
Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.
Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself
Have in our armours watch'd the winter's night,
Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat,
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace;
And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen;
And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.

CLARENCE:
The duty that I owe unto your majesty
I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.

GLOUCESTER:
And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.

KING EDWARD IV:
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.

CLARENCE:
What will your grace have done with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, to the king of France
Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

KING EDWARD IV:
Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
And now what rests but that we spend the time
With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
Sound drums and trumpets! farewell sour annoy!
For here, I hope, begins our lasting joy.

ARCHIDAMUS:
If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on
the like occasion whereon my services are now on
foot, you shall see, as I have said, great
difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.

CAMILLO:
I think, this coming summer, the King of Sicilia
means to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.

ARCHIDAMUS:
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be
justified in our loves; for indeed--

CAMILLO:
Beseech you,--

ARCHIDAMUS:
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge:
we cannot with such magnificence--in so rare--I know
not what to say. We will give you sleepy drinks,
that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience,
may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse
us.

CAMILLO:
You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.

ARCHIDAMUS:
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me
and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.

CAMILLO:
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia.
They were trained together in their childhoods; and
there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,
which cannot choose but branch now. Since their
more mature dignities and royal necessities made
separation of their society, their encounters,
though not personal, have been royally attorneyed
with interchange of gifts, letters, loving
embassies; that they have seemed to be together,
though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and
embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed
winds. The heavens continue their loves!

ARCHIDAMUS:
I think there is not in the world either malice or
matter to alter it. You have an unspeakable
comfort of your young prince Mamillius: it is a
gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came
into my note.

CAMILLO:
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him: it
is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the
subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on
crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to
see him a man.

ARCHIDAMUS:
Would they else be content to die?

CAMILLO:
Yes; if there were no other excuse why they should
desire to live.

ARCHIDAMUS:
If the king had no son, they would desire to live
on crutches till he had one.

POLIXENES:
Nine changes of the watery star hath been
The shepherd's note since we have left our throne
Without a burthen: time as long again
Would be find up, my brother, with our thanks;
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher,
Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
With one 'We thank you' many thousands moe
That go before it.

LEONTES:
Stay your thanks a while;
And pay them when you part.

POLIXENES:
Sir, that's to-morrow.
I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance
Or breed upon our absence; that may blow
No sneaping winds at home, to make us say
'This is put forth too truly:' besides, I have stay'd
To tire your royalty.

LEONTES:
We are tougher, brother,
Than you can put us to't.

POLIXENES:
No longer stay.

LEONTES:
One seven-night longer.

POLIXENES:
Very sooth, to-morrow.

LEONTES:
We'll part the time between's then; and in that
I'll no gainsaying.

POLIXENES:
Press me not, beseech you, so.
There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world,
So soon as yours could win me: so it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
'Twere needful I denied it. My affairs
Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder
Were in your love a whip to me; my stay
To you a charge and trouble: to save both,
Farewell, our brother.

LEONTES:
Tongue-tied, our queen?
speak you.

HERMIONE:
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
You have drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure
All in Bohemia's well; this satisfaction
The by-gone day proclaim'd: say this to him,
He's beat from his best ward.

LEONTES:
Well said, Hermione.

HERMIONE:
To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong:
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.
Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
You take my lord, I'll give him my commission
To let him there a month behind the gest
Prefix'd for's parting: yet, good deed, Leontes,
I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind
What lady-she her lord. You'll stay?

POLIXENES:
No, madam.

HERMIONE:
Nay, but you will?

POLIXENES:
I may not, verily.

HERMIONE:
Verily!
You put me off with limber vows; but I,
Though you would seek to unsphere the
stars with oaths,
Should yet say 'Sir, no going.' Verily,
You shall not go: a lady's 'Verily' 's
As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees
When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you?
My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,'
One of them you shall be.

POLIXENES:
Your guest, then, madam:
To be your prisoner should import offending;
Which is for me less easy to commit
Than you to punish.

HERMIONE:
Not your gaoler, then,
But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question you
Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys:
You were pretty lordings then?

POLIXENES:
We were, fair queen,
Two lads that thought there was no more behind
But such a day to-morrow as to-day,
And to be boy eternal.

HERMIONE:
Was not my lord
The verier wag o' the two?

POLIXENES:
We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun,
And bleat the one at the other: what we changed
Was innocence for innocence; we knew not
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd
That any did. Had we pursued that life,
And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd
With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven
Boldly 'not guilty;' the imposition clear'd
Hereditary ours.

HERMIONE:
By this we gather
You have tripp'd since.

POLIXENES:
O my most sacred lady!
Temptations have since then been born to's; for
In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;
Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes
Of my young play-fellow.

HERMIONE:
Grace to boot!
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
Your queen and I are devils: yet go on;
The offences we have made you do we'll answer,
If you first sinn'd with us and that with us
You did continue fault and that you slipp'd not
With any but with us.

LEONTES:
Is he won yet?

HERMIONE:
He'll stay my lord.

LEONTES:
At my request he would not.
Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest
To better purpose.

HERMIONE:
Never?

LEONTES:
Never, but once.

HERMIONE:
What! have I twice said well? when was't before?
I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's
As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Our praises are our wages: you may ride's
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
With spur we beat an acre. But to the goal:
My last good deed was to entreat his stay:
What was my first? it has an elder sister,
Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!
But once before I spoke to the purpose: when?
Nay, let me have't; I long.

LEONTES:
Why, that was when
Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter
'I am yours for ever.'

HERMIONE:
'Tis grace indeed.
Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:
The one for ever earn'd a royal husband;
The other for some while a friend.

LEONTES:

MAMILLIUS:
Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES:
I' fecks!
Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast
smutch'd thy nose?
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:
And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf
Are all call'd neat.--Still virginalling
Upon his palm!--How now, you wanton calf!
Art thou my calf?

MAMILLIUS:
Yes, if you will, my lord.

LEONTES:
Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,
To be full like me: yet they say we are
Almost as like as eggs; women say so,
That will say anything but were they false
As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes
No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!
Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam?--may't be?--
Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicatest with dreams;--how can this be?--
With what's unreal thou coactive art,
And fellow'st nothing: then 'tis very credent
Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost,
And that beyond commission, and I find it,
And that to the infection of my brains
And hardening of my brows.

POLIXENES:
What means Sicilia?

HERMIONE:
He something seems unsettled.

POLIXENES:
How, my lord!
What cheer? how is't with you, best brother?

HERMIONE:
You look as if you held a brow of much distraction
Are you moved, my lord?

LEONTES:
No, in good earnest.
How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd,
In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled,
Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous:
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend,
Will you take eggs for money?

MAMILLIUS:
No, my lord, I'll fight.

LEONTES:
You will! why, happy man be's dole! My brother,
Are you so fond of your young prince as we
Do seem to be of ours?

POLIXENES:
If at home, sir,
He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,
Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all:
He makes a July's day short as December,
And with his varying childness cures in me
Thoughts that would thick my blood.

LEONTES:
So stands this squire
Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord,
And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione,
How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:
Next to thyself and my young rover, he's
Apparent to my heart.

HERMIONE:
If you would seek us,
We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?

LEONTES:
To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found,
Be you beneath the sky.
I am angling now,
Though you perceive me not how I give line.
Go to, go to!
How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
And arms her with the boldness of a wife
To her allowing husband!
Gone already!
Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head and
ears a fork'd one!
Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I
Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour
Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play.
There have been,
Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;
And many a man there is, even at this present,
Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm,
That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence
And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by
Sir Smile, his neighbour: nay, there's comfort in't
Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd,
As mine, against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic for't there is none;
It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it,
From east, west, north and south: be it concluded,
No barricado for a belly; know't;
It will let in and out the enemy
With bag and baggage: many thousand on's
Have the disease, and feel't not. How now, boy!

MAMILLIUS:
I am like you, they say.

LEONTES:
Why that's some comfort. What, Camillo there?

CAMILLO:
Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES:
Go play, Mamillius; thou'rt an honest man.
Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.

CAMILLO:
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:
When you cast out, it still came home.

LEONTES:
Didst note it?

CAMILLO:
He would not stay at your petitions: made
His business more material.

LEONTES:
Didst perceive it?
They're here with me already, whispering, rounding
'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone,
When I shall gust it last. How came't, Camillo,
That he did stay?

CAMILLO:
At the good queen's entreaty.

LEONTES:
At the queen's be't: 'good' should be pertinent
But, so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding pate but thine?
For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
More than the common blocks: not noted, is't,
But of the finer natures? by some severals
Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes
Perchance are to this business purblind? say.

CAMILLO:
Business, my lord! I think most understand
Bohemia stays here longer.

LEONTES:
Ha!

CAMILLO:
Stays here longer.

LEONTES:
Ay, but why?

CAMILLO:
To satisfy your highness and the entreaties
Of our most gracious mistress.

LEONTES:
Satisfy!
The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy!
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou
Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed
Thy penitent reform'd: but we have been
Deceived in thy integrity, deceived
In that which seems so.

CAMILLO:
Be it forbid, my lord!

LEONTES:
To bide upon't, thou art not honest, or,
If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From course required; or else thou must be counted
A servant grafted in my serious trust
And therein negligent; or else a fool
That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn,
And takest it all for jest.

CAMILLO:
My gracious lord,
I may be negligent, foolish and fearful;
In every one of these no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the world,
Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
If ever I were wilful-negligent,
It was my folly; if industriously
I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
Where of the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord,
Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty
Is never free of. But, beseech your grace,
Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
By its own visage: if I then deny it,
'Tis none of mine.

LEONTES:
Ha' not you seen, Camillo,--
But that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn,--or heard,--
For to a vision so apparent rumour
Cannot be mute,--or thought,--for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think,--
My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say
My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
Before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.

CAMILLO:
I would not be a stander-by to hear
My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Than this; which to reiterate were sin
As deep as that, though true.

LEONTES:
Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?
Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career
Of laughing with a sigh?--a note infallible
Of breaking honesty--horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? wishing clocks more swift?
Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing?
Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing;
The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing;
My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,
If this be nothing.

CAMILLO:
Good my lord, be cured
Of this diseased opinion, and betimes;
For 'tis most dangerous.

LEONTES:
Say it be, 'tis true.

CAMILLO:
No, no, my lord.

LEONTES:
It is; you lie, you lie:
I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,
Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
Or else a hovering temporizer, that
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both: were my wife's liver
Infected as her life, she would not live
The running of one glass.

CAMILLO:
Who does infect her?

LEONTES:
Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging
About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I
Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine honour as their profits,
Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou,
His cupbearer,--whom I from meaner form
Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,
How I am galled,--mightst bespice a cup,
To give mine enemy a lasting wink;
Which draught to me were cordial.

CAMILLO:
Sir, my lord,
I could do this, and that with no rash potion,
But with a lingering dram that should not work
Maliciously like poison: but I cannot
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
So sovereignly being honourable.
I have loved thee,--

LEONTES:
Make that thy question, and go rot!
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
The purity and whiteness of my sheets,
Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps,
Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son,
Who I do think is mine and love as mine,
Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this?
Could man so blench?

CAMILLO:
I must believe you, sir:
I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for't;
Provided that, when he's removed, your highness
Will take again your queen as yours at first,
Even for your son's sake; and thereby for sealing
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
Known and allied to yours.

LEONTES:
Thou dost advise me
Even so as I mine own course have set down:
I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.

CAMILLO:
My lord,
Go then; and with a countenance as clear
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer:
If from me he have wholesome beverage,
Account me not your servant.

LEONTES:
This is all:
Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Do't not, thou split'st thine own.

CAMILLO:
I'll do't, my lord.

LEONTES:
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.

CAMILLO:
O miserable lady! But, for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do't
Is the obedience to a master, one
Who in rebellion with himself will have
All that are his so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows. If I could find example
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
And flourish'd after, I'ld not do't; but since
Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one,
Let villany itself forswear't. I must
Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain
To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now!
Here comes Bohemia.

POLIXENES:
This is strange: methinks
My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
Good day, Camillo.

CAMILLO:
Hail, most royal sir!

POLIXENES:
What is the news i' the court?

CAMILLO:
None rare, my lord.

POLIXENES:
The king hath on him such a countenance
As he had lost some province and a region
Loved as he loves himself: even now I met him
With customary compliment; when he,
Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling
A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and
So leaves me to consider what is breeding
That changeth thus his manners.

CAMILLO:
I dare not know, my lord.

POLIXENES:
How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts;
For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.
And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
Which shows me mine changed too; for I must be
A party in this alteration, finding
Myself thus alter'd with 't.

CAMILLO:
There is a sickness
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
I cannot name the disease; and it is caught
Of you that yet are well.

POLIXENES:
How! caught of me!
Make me not sighted like the basilisk:
I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better
By my regard, but kill'd none so. Camillo,--
As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns
Our gentry than our parents' noble names,
In whose success we are gentle,--I beseech you,
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not
In ignorant concealment.

CAMILLO:
I may not answer.

POLIXENES:
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well!
I must be answer'd. Dost thou hear, Camillo,
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidency thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
Which way to be prevented, if to be;
If not, how best to bear it.

CAMILLO:
Sir, I will tell you;
Since I am charged in honour and by him
That I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be even as swiftly follow'd as
I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me
Cry lost, and so good night!

POLIXENES:
On, good Camillo.

CAMILLO:
I am appointed him to murder you.

POLIXENES:
By whom, Camillo?

CAMILLO:
By the king.

POLIXENES:
For what?

CAMILLO:
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,
As he had seen't or been an instrument
To vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queen
Forbiddenly.

POLIXENES:
O, then my best blood turn
To an infected jelly and my name
Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
Turn then my freshest reputation to
A savour that may strike the dullest nostril
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunn'd,
Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection
That e'er was heard or read!

CAMILLO:
Swear his thought over
By each particular star in heaven and
By all their influences, you may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
As or by oath remove or counsel shake
The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
Is piled upon his faith and will continue
The standing of his body.

POLIXENES:
How should this grow?

CAMILLO:
I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to
Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this trunk which you
Shall bear along impawn'd, away to-night!
Your followers I will whisper to the business,
And will by twos and threes at several posterns
Clear them o' the city. For myself, I'll put
My fortunes to your service, which are here
By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain;
For, by the honour of my parents, I
Have utter'd truth: which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, thereon
His execution sworn.

POLIXENES:
I do believe thee:
I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand:
Be pilot to me and thy places shall
Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and
My people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This jealousy
Is for a precious creature: as she's rare,
Must it be great, and as his person's mighty,
Must it be violent, and as he does conceive
He is dishonour'd by a man which ever
Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me:
Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo;
I will respect thee as a father if
Thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid.

CAMILLO:
It is in mine authority to command
The keys of all the posterns: please your highness
To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.

HERMIONE:
Take the boy to you: he so troubles me,
'Tis past enduring.

First Lady:
Come, my gracious lord,
Shall I be your playfellow?

MAMILLIUS:
No, I'll none of you.

First Lady:
Why, my sweet lord?

MAMILLIUS:
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if
I were a baby still. I love you better.

Second Lady:
And why so, my lord?

MAMILLIUS:
Not for because
Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,
Become some women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
Or a half-moon made with a pen.

Second Lady:
Who taught you this?

MAMILLIUS:
I learnt it out of women's faces. Pray now
What colour are your eyebrows?

First Lady:
Blue, my lord.

MAMILLIUS:
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.

First Lady:
Hark ye;
The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall
Present our services to a fine new prince
One of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us,
If we would have you.

Second Lady:
She is spread of late
Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!

HERMIONE:
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now
I am for you again: pray you, sit by us,
And tell 's a tale.

MAMILLIUS:
Merry or sad shall't be?

HERMIONE:
As merry as you will.

MAMILLIUS:
A sad tale's best for winter: I have one
Of sprites and goblins.

HERMIONE:
Let's have that, good sir.
Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best
To fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it.

MAMILLIUS:
There was a man--

HERMIONE:
Nay, come, sit down; then on.

MAMILLIUS:
Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly;
Yond crickets shall not hear it.

HERMIONE:
Come on, then,
And give't me in mine ear.

LEONTES:
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?

First Lord:
Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them
Even to their ships.

LEONTES:
How blest am I
In my just censure, in my true opinion!
Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed
In being so blest! There may be in the cup
A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart,
And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
Is not infected: but if one present
The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
With violent hefts. I have drunk,
and seen the spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his pander:
There is a plot against my life, my crown;
All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain
Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him:
He has discover'd my design, and I
Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick
For them to play at will. How came the posterns
So easily open?

First Lord:
By his great authority;
Which often hath no less prevail'd than so
On your command.

LEONTES:
I know't too well.
Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him.

HERMIONE:
What is this? sport?

LEONTES:
Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;
Away with him! and let her sport herself
With that she's big with; for 'tis Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.

HERMIONE:
But I'ld say he had not,
And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
Howe'er you lean to the nayward.

LEONTES:
You, my lords,
Look on her, mark her well; be but about
To say 'she is a goodly lady,' and
The justice of your bearts will thereto add
'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:'
Praise her but for this her without-door form,
Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight
The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
That calumny doth use--O, I am out--
That mercy does, for calumny will sear
Virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and ha's,
When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between
Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known,
From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
She's an adulteress.

HERMIONE:
Should a villain say so,
The most replenish'd villain in the world,
He were as much more villain: you, my lord,
Do but mistake.

LEONTES:
You have mistook, my lady,
Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing!
Which I'll not call a creature of thy place,
Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
Should a like language use to all degrees
And mannerly distinguishment leave out
Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said
She's an adulteress; I have said with whom:
More, she's a traitor and Camillo is
A federary with her, and one that knows
What she should shame to know herself
But with her most vile principal, that she's
A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy
To this their late escape.

HERMIONE:
No, by my life.
Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have publish'd me! Gentle my lord,
You scarce can right me throughly then to say
You did mistake.

LEONTES:
No; if I mistake
In those foundations which I build upon,
The centre is not big enough to bear
A school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison!
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
But that he speaks.

HERMIONE:
There's some ill planet reigns:
I must be patient till the heavens look
With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords,
I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
Commonly are; the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have
That honourable grief lodged here which burns
Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords,
With thoughts so qualified as your charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
The king's will be perform'd!

LEONTES:
Shall I be heard?

HERMIONE:
Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness,
My women may be with me; for you see
My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools;
There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress
Has deserved prison, then abound in tears
As I come out: this action I now go on
Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord:
I never wish'd to see you sorry; now
I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave.

LEONTES:
Go, do our bidding; hence!

First Lord:
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.

ANTIGONUS:
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
Prove violence; in the which three great ones suffer,
Yourself, your queen, your son.

First Lord:
For her, my lord,
I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir,
Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless
I' the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean,
In this which you accuse her.

ANTIGONUS:
If it prove
She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where
I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her;
Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;
For every inch of woman in the world,
Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, If she be.

LEONTES:
Hold your peaces.

First Lord:
Good my lord,--

ANTIGONUS:
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:
You are abused and by some putter-on
That will be damn'd for't; would I knew the villain,
I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flaw'd,
I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven
The second and the third, nine, and some five;
If this prove true, they'll pay for't:
by mine honour,
I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see,
To bring false generations: they are co-heirs;
And I had rather glib myself than they
Should not produce fair issue.

LEONTES:
Cease; no more.
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel't
As you feel doing thus; and see withal
The instruments that feel.

ANTIGONUS:
If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty:
There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy earth.

LEONTES:
What! lack I credit?

First Lord:
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
Upon this ground; and more it would content me
To have her honour true than your suspicion,
Be blamed for't how you might.

LEONTES:
Why, what need we
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this; which if you, or stupefied
Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not
Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all
Properly ours.

ANTIGONUS:
And I wish, my liege,
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
Without more overture.

LEONTES:
How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight,
Added to their familiarity,
Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture,
That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding:
Yet, for a greater confirmation,
For in an act of this importance 'twere
Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post
To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,
Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
Of stuff'd sufficiency: now from the oracle
They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had,
Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?

First Lord:
Well done, my lord.

LEONTES:
Though I am satisfied and need no more
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
Give rest to the minds of others, such as he
Whose ignorant credulity will not
Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person she should be confined,
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
Be left her to perform. Come, follow us;
We are to speak in public; for this business
Will raise us all.

ANTIGONUS:

PAULINA:
The keeper of the prison, call to him;
let him have knowledge who I am.
Good lady,
No court in Europe is too good for thee;
What dost thou then in prison?
Now, good sir,
You know me, do you not?

Gaoler:
For a worthy lady
And one whom much I honour.

PAULINA:
Pray you then,
Conduct me to the queen.

Gaoler:
I may not, madam:
To the contrary I have express commandment.

PAULINA:
Here's ado,
To lock up honesty and honour from
The access of gentle visitors!
Is't lawful, pray you,
To see her women? any of them? Emilia?

Gaoler:
So please you, madam,
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth.

PAULINA:
I pray now, call her.
Withdraw yourselves.

Gaoler:
And, madam,
I must be present at your conference.

PAULINA:
Well, be't so, prithee.
Here's such ado to make no stain a stain
As passes colouring.
Dear gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious lady?

EMILIA:
As well as one so great and so forlorn
May hold together: on her frights and griefs,
Which never tender lady hath born greater,
She is something before her time deliver'd.

PAULINA:
A boy?

EMILIA:
A daughter, and a goodly babe,
Lusty and like to live: the queen receives
Much comfort in't; says 'My poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you.'

PAULINA:
I dare be sworn
These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king,
beshrew them!
He must be told on't, and he shall: the office
Becomes a woman best; I'll take't upon me:
If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister
And never to my red-look'd anger be
The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia,
Commend my best obedience to the queen:
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
I'll show't the king and undertake to be
Her advocate to the loud'st. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight o' the child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades when speaking fails.

EMILIA:
Most worthy madam,
Your honour and your goodness is so evident
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriving issue: there is no lady living
So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship
To visit the next room, I'll presently
Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer;
Who but to-day hammer'd of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honour,
Lest she should be denied.

PAULINA:
Tell her, Emilia.
I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from't
As boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted
I shall do good.

EMILIA:
Now be you blest for it!
I'll to the queen: please you,
come something nearer.

Gaoler:
Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur to pass it,
Having no warrant.

PAULINA:
You need not fear it, sir:
This child was prisoner to the womb and is
By law and process of great nature thence
Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the king nor guilty of,
If any be, the trespass of the queen.

Gaoler:
I do believe it.

PAULINA:
Do not you fear: upon mine honour,
I will stand betwixt you and danger.

LEONTES:
Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness
To bear the matter thus; mere weakness. If
The cause were not in being,--part o' the cause,
She the adulteress; for the harlot king
Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain, plot-proof; but she
I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
Might come to me again. Who's there?

First Servant:
My lord?

LEONTES:
How does the boy?

First Servant:
He took good rest to-night;
'Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.

LEONTES:
To see his nobleness!
Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,
He straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply,
Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself,
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
And downright languish'd. Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares.
Fie, fie! no thought of him:
The thought of my revenges that way
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his alliance; let him be
Until a time may serve: for present vengeance,
Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
Shall she within my power.

First Lord:
You must not enter.

PAULINA:
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
Than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul,
More free than he is jealous.

ANTIGONUS:
That's enough.

Second Servant:
Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commanded
None should come at him.

PAULINA:
Not so hot, good sir:
I come to bring him sleep. 'Tis such as you,
That creep like shadows by him and do sigh
At each his needless heavings, such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking: I
Do come with words as medicinal as true,
Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
That presses him from sleep.

LEONTES:
What noise there, ho?

PAULINA:
No noise, my lord; but needful conference
About some gossips for your highness.

LEONTES:
How!
Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
I charged thee that she should not come about me:
I knew she would.

ANTIGONUS:
I told her so, my lord,
On your displeasure's peril and on mine,
She should not visit you.

LEONTES:
What, canst not rule her?

PAULINA:
From all dishonesty he can: in this,
Unless he take the course that you have done,
Commit me for committing honour, trust it,
He shall not rule me.

ANTIGONUS:
La you now, you hear:
When she will take the rein I let her run;
But she'll not stumble.

PAULINA:
Good my liege, I come;
And, I beseech you, hear me, who profess
Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare
Less appear so in comforting your evils,
Than such as most seem yours: I say, I come
From your good queen.

LEONTES:
Good queen!

PAULINA:
Good queen, my lord,
Good queen; I say good queen;
And would by combat make her good, so were I
A man, the worst about you.

LEONTES:
Force her hence.

PAULINA:
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine own accord I'll off;
But first I'll do my errand. The good queen,
For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;
Here 'tis; commends it to your blessing.

LEONTES:
Out!
A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door:
A most intelligencing bawd!

PAULINA:
Not so:
I am as ignorant in that as you
In so entitling me, and no less honest
Than you are mad; which is enough, I'll warrant,
As this world goes, to pass for honest.

LEONTES:
Traitors!
Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.
Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroosted
By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard;
Take't up, I say; give't to thy crone.

PAULINA:
For ever
Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou
Takest up the princess by that forced baseness
Which he has put upon't!

LEONTES:
He dreads his wife.

PAULINA:
So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubt
You'ld call your children yours.

LEONTES:
A nest of traitors!

ANTIGONUS:
I am none, by this good light.

PAULINA:
Nor I, nor any
But one that's here, and that's himself, for he
The sacred honour of himself, his queen's,
His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,
Whose sting is sharper than the sword's;
and will not--
For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
He cannot be compell'd to't--once remove
The root of his opinion, which is rotten
As ever oak or stone was sound.

LEONTES:
A callat
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;
It is the issue of Polixenes:
Hence with it, and together with the dam
Commit them to the fire!

PAULINA:
It is yours;
And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge,
So like you, 'tis the worse. Behold, my lords,
Although the print be little, the whole matter
And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip,
The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek,
His smiles,
The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him that got it, if thou hast
The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours
No yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does,
Her children not her husband's!

LEONTES:
A gross hag
And, lozel, thou art worthy to be hang'd,
That wilt not stay her tongue.

ANTIGONUS:
Hang all the husbands
That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself
Hardly one subject.

LEONTES:
Once more, take her hence.

PAULINA:
A most unworthy and unnatural lord
Can do no more.

LEONTES:
I'll ha' thee burnt.

PAULINA:
I care not:
It is an heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in't. I'll not call you tyrant;
But this most cruel usage of your queen,
Not able to produce more accusation
Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours
Of tyranny and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the world.

LEONTES:
On your allegiance,
Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
If she did know me one. Away with her!

PAULINA:
I pray you, do not push me; I'll be gone.
Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours:
Jove send her
A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies,
Will never do him good, not one of you.
So, so: farewell; we are gone.

LEONTES:
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
My child? away with't! Even thou, that hast
A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence
And see it instantly consumed with fire;
Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight:
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,
And by good testimony, or I'll seize thy life,
With what thou else call'st thine. If thou refuse
And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;
The bastard brains with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire;
For thou set'st on thy wife.

ANTIGONUS:
I did not, sir:
These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in't.

Lords:
We can: my royal liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither.

LEONTES:
You're liars all.

First Lord:
Beseech your highness, give us better credit:
We have always truly served you, and beseech you
So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg,
As recompense of our dear services
Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.

LEONTES:
I am a feather for each wind that blows:
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
And call me father? better burn it now
Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
It shall not neither. You, sir, come you hither;
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
To save this bastard's life,--for 'tis a bastard,
So sure as this beard's grey,
--what will you adventure
To save this brat's life?

ANTIGONUS:
Any thing, my lord,
That my ability may undergo
And nobleness impose: at least thus much:
I'll pawn the little blood which I have left
To save the innocent: any thing possible.

LEONTES:
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding.

ANTIGONUS:
I will, my lord.

LEONTES:
Mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail
Of any point in't shall not only be
Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry
This female bastard hence and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place quite out
Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,
Without more mercy, to its own protection
And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.

ANTIGONUS:
I swear to do this, though a present death
Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe:
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say
Casting their savageness aside have done
Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deed does require! And blessing
Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!

LEONTES:
No, I'll not rear
Another's issue.

Servant:
Please your highness, posts
From those you sent to the oracle are come
An hour since: Cleomenes and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to the court.

First Lord:
So please you, sir, their speed
Hath been beyond account.

LEONTES:
Twenty-three days
They have been absent: 'tis good speed; foretells
The great Apollo suddenly will have
The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords;
Summon a session, that we may arraign
Our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
A just and open trial. While she lives
My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me,
And think upon my bidding.

CLEOMENES:
The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.

DION:
I shall report,
For most it caught me, the celestial habits,
Methinks I so should term them, and the reverence
Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
How ceremonious, solemn and unearthly
It was i' the offering!

CLEOMENES:
But of all, the burst
And the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle,
Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my sense.
That I was nothing.

DION:
If the event o' the journey
Prove as successful to the queen,--O be't so!--
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on't.

CLEOMENES:
Great Apollo
Turn all to the best! These proclamations,
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
I little like.

DION:
The violent carriage of it
Will clear or end the business: when the oracle,
Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up,
Shall the contents discover, something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh horses!
And gracious be the issue!

LEONTES:
This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
Even pushes 'gainst our heart: the party tried
The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
Of us too much beloved. Let us be clear'd
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in justice, which shall have due course,
Even to the guilt or the purgation.
Produce the prisoner.

Officer:
It is his highness' pleasure that the queen
Appear in person here in court. Silence!

LEONTES:
Read the indictment.

Officer:

HERMIONE:
Since what I am to say must be but that
Which contradicts my accusation and
The testimony on my part no other
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
To say 'not guilty:' mine integrity
Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
Be so received. But thus: if powers divine
Behold our human actions, as they do,
I doubt not then but innocence shall make
False accusation blush and tyranny
Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know,
Who least will seem to do so, my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Than history can pattern, though devised
And play'd to take spectators. For behold me
A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
A moiety of the throne a great king's daughter,
The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing
To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore
Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour,
'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so; since he came,
With what encounter so uncurrent I
Have strain'd to appear thus: if one jot beyond
The bound of honour, or in act or will
That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin
Cry fie upon my grave!

LEONTES:
I ne'er heard yet
That any of these bolder vices wanted
Less impudence to gainsay what they did
Than to perform it first.

HERMIONE:
That's true enough;
Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.

LEONTES:
You will not own it.

HERMIONE:
More than mistress of
Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes,
With whom I am accused, I do confess
I loved him as in honour he required,
With such a kind of love as might become
A lady like me, with a love even such,
So and no other, as yourself commanded:
Which not to have done I think had been in me
Both disobedience and ingratitude
To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke,
Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely
That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes; though it be dish'd
For me to try how: all I know of it
Is that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.

LEONTES:
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have underta'en to do in's absence.

HERMIONE:
Sir,
You speak a language that I understand not:
My life stands in the level of your dreams,
Which I'll lay down.

LEONTES:
Your actions are my dreams;
You had a bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dream'd it. As you were past all shame,--
Those of your fact are so--so past all truth:
Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as
Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
No father owning it,--which is, indeed,
More criminal in thee than it,--so thou
Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
Look for no less than death.

HERMIONE:
Sir, spare your threats:
The bug which you would fright me with I seek.
To me can life be no commodity:
The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,
I do give lost; for I do feel it gone,
But know not how it went. My second joy
And first-fruits of my body, from his presence
I am barr'd, like one infectious. My third comfort
Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast,
The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth,
Haled out to murder: myself on every post
Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred
The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs
To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
Here to this place, i' the open air, before
I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege,
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.
But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life,
I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,
Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd
Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
'Tis rigor and not law. Your honours all,
I do refer me to the oracle:
Apollo be my judge!

First Lord:
This your request
Is altogether just: therefore bring forth,
And in Apollos name, his oracle.

HERMIONE:
The Emperor of Russia was my father:
O that he were alive, and here beholding
His daughter's trial! that he did but see
The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes
Of pity, not revenge!

Officer:
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,
That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
The seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd
Of great Apollo's priest; and that, since then,
You have not dared to break the holy seal
Nor read the secrets in't.

CLEOMENES:
All this we swear.

LEONTES:
Break up the seals and read.

Officer:

Lords:
Now blessed be the great Apollo!

HERMIONE:
Praised!

LEONTES:
Hast thou read truth?

Officer:
Ay, my lord; even so
As it is here set down.

LEONTES:
There is no truth at all i' the oracle:
The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.

Servant:
My lord the king, the king!

LEONTES:
What is the business?

Servant:
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!
The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
Of the queen's speed, is gone.

LEONTES:
How! gone!

Servant:
Is dead.

LEONTES:
Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselves
Do strike at my injustice.
How now there!

PAULINA:
This news is mortal to the queen: look down
And see what death is doing.

LEONTES:
Take her hence:
Her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover:
I have too much believed mine own suspicion:
Beseech you, tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life.
Apollo, pardon
My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle!
I'll reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
For, being transported by my jealousies
To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister to poison
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command, though I with death and with
Reward did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing 't and being done: he, most humane
And fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest
Unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here,
Which you knew great, and to the hazard
Of all encertainties himself commended,
No richer than his honour: how he glisters
Thorough my rust! and how his pity
Does my deeds make the blacker!

PAULINA:
Woe the while!
O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
Break too.

First Lord:
What fit is this, good lady?

PAULINA:
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?
In leads or oils? what old or newer torture
Must I receive, whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny
Together working with thy jealousies,
Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
For girls of nine, O, think what they have done
And then run mad indeed, stark mad! for all
Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betray'dst Polixenes,'twas nothing;
That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant
And damnable ingrateful: nor was't much,
Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour,
To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter
To be or none or little; though a devil
Would have shed water out of fire ere done't:
Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death
Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts,
Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
Blemish'd his gracious dam: this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the last,--O lords,
When I have said, cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen,
The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead,
and vengeance for't
Not dropp'd down yet.

First Lord:
The higher powers forbid!

PAULINA:
I say she's dead; I'll swear't. If word nor oath
Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye,
Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you
As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant!
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren mountain and still winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
To look that way thou wert.

LEONTES:
Go on, go on
Thou canst not speak too much; I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bitterest.

First Lord:
Say no more:
Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
I' the boldness of your speech.

PAULINA:
I am sorry for't:
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent. Alas! I have show'd too much
The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd
To the noble heart. What's gone and what's past help
Should be past grief: do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punish'd, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege
Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman:
The love I bore your queen--lo, fool again!--
I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children;
I'll not remember you of my own lord,
Who is lost too: take your patience to you,
And I'll say nothing.

LEONTES:
Thou didst speak but well
When most the truth; which I receive much better
Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me
To the dead bodies of my queen and son:
One grave shall be for both: upon them shall
The causes of their death appear, unto
Our shame perpetual. Once a day I'll visit
The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation: so long as nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
I daily vow to use it. Come and lead me
Unto these sorrows.

ANTIGONUS:
Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch'd upon
The deserts of Bohemia?

Mariner:
Ay, my lord: and fear
We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
And frown upon 's.

ANTIGONUS:
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;
Look to thy bark: I'll not be long before
I call upon thee.

Mariner:
Make your best haste, and go not
Too far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather;
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
Of prey that keep upon't.

ANTIGONUS:
Go thou away:
I'll follow instantly.

Mariner:
I am glad at heart
To be so rid o' the business.

ANTIGONUS:
Come, poor babe:
I have heard, but not believed,
the spirits o' the dead
May walk again: if such thing be, thy mother
Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another;
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
So fill'd and so becoming: in pure white robes,
Like very sanctity, she did approach
My cabin where I lay; thrice bow'd before me,
And gasping to begin some speech, her eyes
Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon
Did this break-from her: 'Good Antigonus,
Since fate, against thy better disposition,
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita,
I prithee, call't. For this ungentle business
Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see
Thy wife Paulina more.' And so, with shrieks
She melted into air. Affrighted much,
I did in time collect myself and thought
This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys:
Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
I will be squared by this. I do believe
Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that
Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
Either for life or death, upon the earth
Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well!
There lie, and there thy character: there these;
Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
And still rest thine. The storm begins; poor wretch,
That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed
To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I
To be by oath enjoin'd to this. Farewell!
The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have
A lullaby too rough: I never saw
The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!
Well may I get aboard! This is the chase:
I am gone for ever.

Shepherd:
I would there were no age between sixteen and
three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the
rest; for there is nothing in the between but
getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry,
stealing, fighting--Hark you now! Would any but
these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty
hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my
best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find
than the master: if any where I have them, 'tis by
the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't be thy
will what have we here! Mercy on 's, a barne a very
pretty barne! A boy or a child, I wonder? A
pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape:
though I am not bookish, yet I can read
waiting-gentlewoman in the 'scape. This has been
some stair-work, some trunk-work, some
behind-door-work: they were warmer that got this
than the poor thing is here. I'll take it up for
pity: yet I'll tarry till my son come; he hallooed
but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!

Clown:
Hilloa, loa!

Shepherd:
What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk
on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. What
ailest thou, man?

Clown:
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!
but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the
sky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust
a bodkin's point.

Shepherd:
Why, boy, how is it?

Clown:
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,
how it takes up the shore! but that's not the
point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!
sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em; now the
ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon
swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a
cork into a hogshead. And then for the
land-service, to see how the bear tore out his
shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said
his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an
end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned
it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the
sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman roared
and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than
the sea or weather.

Shepherd:
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?

Clown:
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these
sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor
the bear half dined on the gentleman: he's at it
now.

Shepherd:
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!

Clown:
I would you had been by the ship side, to have
helped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.

Shepherd:
Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here,
boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things
dying, I with things newborn. Here's a sight for
thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's
child! look thee here; take up, take up, boy;
open't. So, let's see: it was told me I should be
rich by the fairies. This is some changeling:
open't. What's within, boy?

Clown:
You're a made old man: if the sins of your youth
are forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!

Shepherd:
This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so: up
with't, keep it close: home, home, the next way.
We are lucky, boy; and to be so still requires
nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, good
boy, the next way home.

Clown:
Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go see
if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much
he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they
are hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll bury
it.

Shepherd:
That's a good deed. If thou mayest discern by that
which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the
sight of him.

Clown:
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i' the ground.

Shepherd:
'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.

Time:
I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror
Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error,
Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
To me or my swift passage, that I slide
O'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To o'erthrow law and in one self-born hour
To plant and o'erwhelm custom. Let me pass
The same I am, ere ancient'st order was
Or what is now received: I witness to
The times that brought them in; so shall I do
To the freshest things now reigning and make stale
The glistering of this present, as my tale
Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass and give my scene such growing
As you had slept between: Leontes leaving,
The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
Gentle spectators, that I now may be
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
I mentioned a son o' the king's, which Florizel
I now name to you; and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wondering: what of her ensues
I list not prophecy; but let Time's news
Be known when 'tis brought forth.
A shepherd's daughter,
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is the argument of Time. Of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now;
If never, yet that Time himself doth say
He wishes earnestly you never may.

POLIXENES:
I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate:
'tis a sickness denying thee any thing; a death to
grant this.

CAMILLO:
It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though
I have for the most part been aired abroad, I
desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent
king, my master, hath sent for me; to whose feeling
sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to
think so, which is another spur to my departure.

POLIXENES:
As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of
thy services by leaving me now: the need I have of
thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to
have had thee than thus to want thee: thou, having
made me businesses which none without thee can
sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute
them thyself or take away with thee the very
services thou hast done; which if I have not enough
considered, as too much I cannot, to be more
thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit
therein the heaping friendships. Of that fatal
country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very
naming punishes me with the remembrance of that
penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king,
my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen
and children are even now to be afresh lamented.
Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my
son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not
being gracious, than they are in losing them when
they have approved their virtues.

CAMILLO:
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. What
his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I
have missingly noted, he is of late much retired
from court and is less frequent to his princely
exercises than formerly he hath appeared.

POLIXENES:
I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some
care; so far that I have eyes under my service which
look upon his removedness; from whom I have this
intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a
most homely shepherd; a man, they say, that from
very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his
neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.

CAMILLO:
I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a
daughter of most rare note: the report of her is
extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.

POLIXENES:
That's likewise part of my intelligence; but, I
fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. Thou
shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not
appearing what we are, have some question with the
shepherd; from whose simplicity I think it not
uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither.
Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and
lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.

CAMILLO:
I willingly obey your command.

POLIXENES:
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.

AUTOLYCUS:
When daffodils begin to peer,
With heigh! the doxy over the dale,
Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year;
For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale.
The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
Doth set my pugging tooth on edge;
For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.
The lark, that tirra-lyra chants,
With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay,
Are summer songs for me and my aunts,
While we lie tumbling in the hay.
I have served Prince Florizel and in my time
wore three-pile; but now I am out of service:
But shall I go mourn for that, my dear?
The pale moon shines by night:
And when I wander here and there,
I then do most go right.
If tinkers may have leave to live,
And bear the sow-skin budget,
Then my account I well may, give,
And in the stocks avouch it.
My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to
lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus; who
being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise
a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and
drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is
the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful
on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to
me: for the life to come, I sleep out the thought
of it. A prize! a prize!

Clown:
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod
yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundred
shorn. what comes the wool to?

AUTOLYCUS:

Clown:
I cannot do't without counters. Let me see; what am
I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound
of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,--what will
this sister of mine do with rice? But my father
hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it
on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for
the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good
ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but
one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to
horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden
pies; mace; dates?--none, that's out of my note;
nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I
may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of
raisins o' the sun.

AUTOLYCUS:
O that ever I was born!

Clown:
I' the name of me--

AUTOLYCUS:
O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; and
then, death, death!

Clown:
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay
on thee, rather than have these off.

AUTOLYCUS:
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more
than the stripes I have received, which are mighty
ones and millions.

Clown:
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a
great matter.

AUTOLYCUS:
I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel
ta'en from me, and these detestable things put upon
me.

Clown:
What, by a horseman, or a footman?

AUTOLYCUS:
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.

Clown:
Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he
has left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat,
it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,
I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.

AUTOLYCUS:
O, good sir, tenderly, O!

Clown:
Alas, poor soul!

AUTOLYCUS:
O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, my
shoulder-blade is out.

Clown:
How now! canst stand?

AUTOLYCUS:

Clown:
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.

AUTOLYCUS:
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I have
a kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence,
unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, or
any thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you;
that kills my heart.

Clown:
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?

AUTOLYCUS:
A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with
troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the
prince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his
virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court.

Clown:
His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whipped
out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay
there; and yet it will no more but abide.

AUTOLYCUS:
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well: he
hath been since an ape-bearer; then a
process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a
motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's
wife within a mile where my land and living lies;
and, having flown over many knavish professions, he
settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.

Clown:
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts
wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.

AUTOLYCUS:
Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue that
put me into this apparel.

Clown:
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had
but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.

AUTOLYCUS:
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I am
false of heart that way; and that he knew, I warrant
him.

Clown:
How do you now?

AUTOLYCUS:
Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand and
walk: I will even take my leave of you, and pace
softly towards my kinsman's.

Clown:
Shall I bring thee on the way?

AUTOLYCUS:
No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.

Clown:
Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for our
sheep-shearing.

AUTOLYCUS:
Prosper you, sweet sir!
Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.
I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if I
make not this cheat bring out another and the
shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name
put in the book of virtue!
Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,
And merrily hent the stile-a:
A merry heart goes all the day,
Your sad tires in a mile-a.

FLORIZEL:
These your unusual weeds to each part of you
Do give a life: no shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in April's front. This your sheep-shearing
Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
And you the queen on't.

PERDITA:
Sir, my gracious lord,
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me:
O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,
The gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured
With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
Most goddess-like prank'd up: but that our feasts
In every mess have folly and the feeders
Digest it with a custom, I should blush
To see you so attired, sworn, I think,
To show myself a glass.

FLORIZEL:
I bless the time
When my good falcon made her flight across
Thy father's ground.

PERDITA:
Now Jove afford you cause!
To me the difference forges dread; your greatness
Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble
To think your father, by some accident,
Should pass this way as you did: O, the Fates!
How would he look, to see his work so noble
Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold
The sternness of his presence?

FLORIZEL:
Apprehend
Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves,
Humbling their deities to love, have taken
The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter
Became a bull, and bellow'd; the green Neptune
A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god,
Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts
Burn hotter than my faith.

PERDITA:
O, but, sir,
Your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis
Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king:
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak, that you must
change this purpose,
Or I my life.

FLORIZEL:
Thou dearest Perdita,
With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not
The mirth o' the feast. Or I'll be thine, my fair,
Or not my father's. For I cannot be
Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle;
Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial which
We two have sworn shall come.

PERDITA:
O lady Fortune,
Stand you auspicious!

FLORIZEL:
See, your guests approach:
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
And let's be red with mirth.

Shepherd:
Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
Both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all;
Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here,
At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle;
On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire
With labour and the thing she took to quench it,
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one and not
The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid
These unknown friends to's welcome; for it is
A way to make us better friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes and present yourself
That which you are, mistress o' the feast: come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.

PERDITA:

POLIXENES:
Shepherdess,
A fair one are you--well you fit our ages
With flowers of winter.

PERDITA:
Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest
flowers o' the season
Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors,
Which some call nature's bastards: of that kind
Our rustic garden's barren; and I care not
To get slips of them.

POLIXENES:
Wherefore, gentle maiden,
Do you neglect them?

PERDITA:
For I have heard it said
There is an art which in their piedness shares
With great creating nature.

POLIXENES:
Say there be;
Yet nature is made better by no mean
But nature makes that mean: so, over that art
Which you say adds to nature, is an art
That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of nobler race: this is an art
Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
The art itself is nature.

PERDITA:
So it is.

POLIXENES:
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
And do not call them bastards.

PERDITA:
I'll not put
The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
No more than were I painted I would wish
This youth should say 'twere well and only therefore
Desire to breed by me. Here's flowers for you;
Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram;
The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun
And with him rises weeping: these are flowers
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. You're very welcome.

CAMILLO:
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.

PERDITA:
Out, alas!
You'd be so lean, that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through.
Now, my fair'st friend,
I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might
Become your time of day; and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your virgin branches yet
Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina,
For the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall
From Dis's waggon! daffodils,
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Bight Phoebus in his strength--a malady
Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and
The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
The flower-de-luce being one! O, these I lack,
To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
To strew him o'er and o'er!

FLORIZEL:
What, like a corse?

PERDITA:
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;
Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried,
But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers:
Methinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine
Does change my disposition.

FLORIZEL:
What you do
Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet.
I'ld have you do it ever: when you sing,
I'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs,
To sing them too: when you do dance, I wish you
A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that; move still, still so,
And own no other function: each your doing,
So singular in each particular,
Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,
That all your acts are queens.

PERDITA:
O Doricles,
Your praises are too large: but that your youth,
And the true blood which peepeth fairly through't,
Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,
With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
You woo'd me the false way.

FLORIZEL:
I think you have
As little skill to fear as I have purpose
To put you to't. But come; our dance, I pray:
Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,
That never mean to part.

PERDITA:
I'll swear for 'em.

POLIXENES:
This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever
Ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Too noble for this place.

CAMILLO:
He tells her something
That makes her blood look out: good sooth, she is
The queen of curds and cream.

Clown:
Come on, strike up!

DORCAS:
Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic,
To mend her kissing with!

MOPSA:
Now, in good time!

Clown:
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
Come, strike up!

POLIXENES:
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
Which dances with your daughter?

Shepherd:
They call him Doricles; and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding: but I have it
Upon his own report and I believe it;
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter:
I think so too; for never gazed the moon
Upon the water as he'll stand and read
As 'twere my daughter's eyes: and, to be plain.
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.

POLIXENES:
She dances featly.

Shepherd:
So she does any thing; though I report it,
That should be silent: if young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.

Servant:
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the
door, you would never dance again after a tabour and
pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you: he sings
several tunes faster than you'll tell money; he
utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's
ears grew to his tunes.

Clown:
He could never come better; he shall come in. I
love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful
matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing
indeed and sung lamentably.

Servant:
He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no
milliner can so fit his customers with gloves: he
has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without
bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate
burthens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump
her;' and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would,
as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into
the matter, he makes the maid to answer 'Whoop, do me
no harm, good man;' puts him off, slights him, with
'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'

POLIXENES:
This is a brave fellow.

Clown:
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited
fellow. Has he any unbraided wares?

Servant:
He hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow;
points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can
learnedly handle, though they come to him by the
gross: inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns: why, he
sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you
would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants
to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.

Clown:
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.

PERDITA:
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes.

Clown:
You have of these pedlars, that have more in them
than you'ld think, sister.

PERDITA:
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.

AUTOLYCUS:
Lawn as white as driven snow;
Cyprus black as e'er was crow;
Gloves as sweet as damask roses;
Masks for faces and for noses;
Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,
Perfume for a lady's chamber;
Golden quoifs and stomachers,
For my lads to give their dears:
Pins and poking-sticks of steel,
What maids lack from head to heel:
Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;
Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.

Clown:
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take
no money of me; but being enthralled as I am, it
will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.

MOPSA:
I was promised them against the feast; but they come
not too late now.

DORCAS:
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.

MOPSA:
He hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he has
paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.

Clown:
Is there no manners left among maids? will they
wear their plackets where they should bear their
faces? Is there not milking-time, when you are
going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these
secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all
our guests? 'tis well they are whispering: clamour
your tongues, and not a word more.

MOPSA:
I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace
and a pair of sweet gloves.

Clown:
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way
and lost all my money?

AUTOLYCUS:
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;
therefore it behoves men to be wary.

Clown:
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.

AUTOLYCUS:
I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.

Clown:
What hast here? ballads?

MOPSA:
Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o'
life, for then we are sure they are true.

AUTOLYCUS:
Here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer's
wife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a
burthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads and
toads carbonadoed.

MOPSA:
Is it true, think you?

AUTOLYCUS:
Very true, and but a month old.

DORCAS:
Bless me from marrying a usurer!

AUTOLYCUS:
Here's the midwife's name to't, one Mistress
Tale-porter, and five or six honest wives that were
present. Why should I carry lies abroad?

MOPSA:
Pray you now, buy it.

Clown:
Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moe
ballads; we'll buy the other things anon.

AUTOLYCUS:
Here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon
the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April,
forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this
ballad against the hard hearts of maids: it was
thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold
fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that
loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.

DORCAS:
Is it true too, think you?

AUTOLYCUS:
Five justices' hands at it, and witnesses more than
my pack will hold.

Clown:
Lay it by too: another.

AUTOLYCUS:
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.

MOPSA:
Let's have some merry ones.

AUTOLYCUS:
Why, this is a passing merry one and goes to
the tune of 'Two maids wooing a man:' there's
scarce a maid westward but she sings it; 'tis in
request, I can tell you.

MOPSA:
We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thou
shalt hear; 'tis in three parts.

DORCAS:
We had the tune on't a month ago.

AUTOLYCUS:
I can bear my part; you must know 'tis my
occupation; have at it with you.

AUTOLYCUS:
Get you hence, for I must go
Where it fits not you to know.

DORCAS:
Whither?

MOPSA:
O, whither?

DORCAS:
Whither?

MOPSA:
It becomes thy oath full well,
Thou to me thy secrets tell.

DORCAS:
Me too, let me go thither.

MOPSA:
Or thou goest to the orange or mill.

DORCAS:
If to either, thou dost ill.

AUTOLYCUS:
Neither.

DORCAS:
What, neither?

AUTOLYCUS:
Neither.

DORCAS:
Thou hast sworn my love to be.

MOPSA:
Thou hast sworn it more to me:
Then whither goest? say, whither?

Clown:
We'll have this song out anon by ourselves: my
father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll
not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack after
me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's
have the first choice. Follow me, girls.

AUTOLYCUS:
And you shall pay well for 'em.
Will you buy any tape,
Or lace for your cape,
My dainty duck, my dear-a?
Any silk, any thread,
Any toys for your head,
Of the new'st and finest, finest wear-a?
Come to the pedlar;
Money's a medler.
That doth utter all men's ware-a.

Servant:
Master, there is three carters, three shepherds,
three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made
themselves all men of hair, they call themselves
Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches
say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are
not in't; but they themselves are o' the mind, if it
be not too rough for some that know little but
bowling, it will please plentifully.

Shepherd:
Away! we'll none on 't: here has been too much
homely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.

POLIXENES:
You weary those that refresh us: pray, let's see
these four threes of herdsmen.

Servant:
One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath
danced before the king; and not the worst of the
three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.

Shepherd:
Leave your prating: since these good men are
pleased, let them come in; but quickly now.

Servant:
Why, they stay at door, sir.

POLIXENES:
O, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.
Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.
He's simple and tells much.
How now, fair shepherd!
Your heart is full of something that does take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
And handed love as you do, I was wont
To load my she with knacks: I would have ransack'd
The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it
To her acceptance; you have let him go
And nothing marted with him. If your lass
Interpretation should abuse and call this
Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
For a reply, at least if you make a care
Of happy holding her.

FLORIZEL:
Old sir, I know
She prizes not such trifles as these are:
The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd
Up in my heart; which I have given already,
But not deliver'd. O, hear me breathe my life
Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,
Hath sometime loved! I take thy hand, this hand,
As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd
snow that's bolted
By the northern blasts twice o'er.

POLIXENES:
What follows this?
How prettily the young swain seems to wash
The hand was fair before! I have put you out:
But to your protestation; let me hear
What you profess.

FLORIZEL:
Do, and be witness to 't.

POLIXENES:
And this my neighbour too?

FLORIZEL:
And he, and more
Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all:
That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,
Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
Without her love; for her employ them all;
Commend them and condemn them to her service
Or to their own perdition.

POLIXENES:
Fairly offer'd.

CAMILLO:
This shows a sound affection.

Shepherd:
But, my daughter,
Say you the like to him?

PERDITA:
I cannot speak
So well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better:
By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
The purity of his.

Shepherd:
Take hands, a bargain!
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her portion equal his.

FLORIZEL:
O, that must be
I' the virtue of your daughter: one being dead,
I shall have more than you can dream of yet;
Enough then for your wonder. But, come on,
Contract us 'fore these witnesses.

Shepherd:
Come, your hand;
And, daughter, yours.

POLIXENES:
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
Have you a father?

FLORIZEL:
I have: but what of him?

POLIXENES:
Knows he of this?

FLORIZEL:
He neither does nor shall.

POLIXENES:
Methinks a father
Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
That best becomes the table. Pray you once more,
Is not your father grown incapable
Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid
With age and altering rheums? can he speak? hear?
Know man from man? dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing
But what he did being childish?

FLORIZEL:
No, good sir;
He has his health and ampler strength indeed
Than most have of his age.

POLIXENES:
By my white beard,
You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
Something unfilial: reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The father, all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity, should hold some counsel
In such a business.

FLORIZEL:
I yield all this;
But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
My father of this business.

POLIXENES:
Let him know't.

FLORIZEL:
He shall not.

POLIXENES:
Prithee, let him.

FLORIZEL:
No, he must not.

Shepherd:
Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.

FLORIZEL:
Come, come, he must not.
Mark our contract.

POLIXENES:
Mark your divorce, young sir,
Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base
To be acknowledged: thou a sceptre's heir,
That thus affect'st a sheep-hook! Thou old traitor,
I am sorry that by hanging thee I can
But shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know
The royal fool thou copest with,--

Shepherd:
O, my heart!

POLIXENES:
I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made
More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy,
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never
I mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession;
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words:
Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment.--
Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too,
That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
Unworthy thee,--if ever henceforth thou
These rural latches to his entrance open,
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
I will devise a death as cruel for thee
As thou art tender to't.

PERDITA:
Even here undone!
I was not much afeard; for once or twice
I was about to speak and tell him plainly,
The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
Hides not his visage from our cottage but
Looks on alike. Will't please you, sir, be gone?
I told you what would come of this: beseech you,
Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,--
Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
But milk my ewes and weep.

CAMILLO:
Why, how now, father!
Speak ere thou diest.

Shepherd:
I cannot speak, nor think
Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir!
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
To die upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones: but now
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
Where no priest shovels in dust. O cursed wretch,
That knew'st this was the prince,
and wouldst adventure
To mingle faith with him! Undone! undone!
If I might die within this hour, I have lived
To die when I desire.

FLORIZEL:
Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd,
But nothing alter'd: what I was, I am;
More straining on for plucking back, not following
My leash unwillingly.

CAMILLO:
Gracious my lord,
You know your father's temper: at this time
He will allow no speech, which I do guess
You do not purpose to him; and as hardly
Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:
Then, till the fury of his highness settle,
Come not before him.

FLORIZEL:
I not purpose it.
I think, Camillo?

CAMILLO:
Even he, my lord.

PERDITA:
How often have I told you 'twould be thus!
How often said, my dignity would last
But till 'twere known!

FLORIZEL:
It cannot fail but by
The violation of my faith; and then
Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together
And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks:
From my succession wipe me, father; I
Am heir to my affection.

CAMILLO:
Be advised.

FLORIZEL:
I am, and by my fancy: if my reason
Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;
If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.

CAMILLO:
This is desperate, sir.

FLORIZEL:
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow;
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or
The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides
In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
To this my fair beloved: therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,
When he shall miss me,--as, in faith, I mean not
To see him any more,--cast your good counsels
Upon his passion; let myself and fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know
And so deliver, I am put to sea
With her whom here I cannot hold on shore;
And most opportune to our need I have
A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting.

CAMILLO:
O my lord!
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.

FLORIZEL:
Hark, Perdita
I'll hear you by and by.

CAMILLO:
He's irremoveable,
Resolved for flight. Now were I happy, if
His going I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
And that unhappy king, my master, whom
I so much thirst to see.

FLORIZEL:
Now, good Camillo;
I am so fraught with curious business that
I leave out ceremony.

CAMILLO:
Sir, I think
You have heard of my poor services, i' the love
That I have borne your father?

FLORIZEL:
Very nobly
Have you deserved: it is my father's music
To speak your deeds, not little of his care
To have them recompensed as thought on.

CAMILLO:
Well, my lord,
If you may please to think I love the king
And through him what is nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self, embrace but my direction:
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration, on mine honour,
I'll point you where you shall have such receiving
As shall become your highness; where you may
Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,
There's no disjunction to be made, but by--
As heavens forefend!--your ruin; marry her,
And, with my best endeavours in your absence,
Your discontenting father strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.

FLORIZEL:
How, Camillo,
May this, almost a miracle, be done?
That I may call thee something more than man
And after that trust to thee.

CAMILLO:
Have you thought on
A place whereto you'll go?

FLORIZEL:
Not any yet:
But as the unthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildly do, so we profess
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies
Of every wind that blows.

CAMILLO:
Then list to me:
This follows, if you will not change your purpose
But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,
And there present yourself and your fair princess,
For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes:
She shall be habited as it becomes
The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
His welcomes forth; asks thee the son forgiveness,
As 'twere i' the father's person; kisses the hands
Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him
'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one
He chides to hell and bids the other grow
Faster than thought or time.

FLORIZEL:
Worthy Camillo,
What colour for my visitation shall I
Hold up before him?

CAMILLO:
Sent by the king your father
To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
What you as from your father shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down:
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say; that he shall not perceive
But that you have your father's bosom there
And speak his very heart.

FLORIZEL:
I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.

CAMILLO:
A cause more promising
Than a wild dedication of yourselves
To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain
To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one to take another;
Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
Do their best office, if they can but stay you
Where you'll be loath to be: besides you know
Prosperity's the very bond of love,
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
Affliction alters.

PERDITA:
One of these is true:
I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
But not take in the mind.

CAMILLO:
Yea, say you so?
There shall not at your father's house these
seven years
Be born another such.

FLORIZEL:
My good Camillo,
She is as forward of her breeding as
She is i' the rear our birth.

CAMILLO:
I cannot say 'tis pity
She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
To most that teach.

PERDITA:
Your pardon, sir; for this
I'll blush you thanks.

FLORIZEL:
My prettiest Perdita!
But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo,
Preserver of my father, now of me,
The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.

CAMILLO:
My lord,
Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes
Do all lie there: it shall be so my care
To have you royally appointed as if
The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
That you may know you shall not want, one word.

AUTOLYCUS:
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his
sworn brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold
all my trumpery; not a counterfeit stone, not a
ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad,
knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring,
to keep my pack from fasting: they throng who
should buy first, as if my trinkets had been
hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer:
by which means I saw whose purse was best in
picture; and what I saw, to my good use I
remembered. My clown, who wants but something to
be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the
wenches' song, that he would not stir his pettitoes
till he had both tune and words; which so drew the
rest of the herd to me that all their other senses
stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it
was senseless; 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a
purse; I could have filed keys off that hung in
chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song,
and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this
time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their
festival purses; and had not the old man come in
with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the king's
son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not
left a purse alive in the whole army.

CAMILLO:
Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.

FLORIZEL:
And those that you'll procure from King Leontes--

CAMILLO:
Shall satisfy your father.

PERDITA:
Happy be you!
All that you speak shows fair.

CAMILLO:
Who have we here?
We'll make an instrument of this, omit
Nothing may give us aid.

AUTOLYCUS:
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.

CAMILLO:
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fear
not, man; here's no harm intended to thee.

AUTOLYCUS:
I am a poor fellow, sir.

CAMILLO:
Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from
thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty we must
make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly,
--thou must think there's a necessity in't,--and
change garments with this gentleman: though the
pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee,
there's some boot.

AUTOLYCUS:
I am a poor fellow, sir.
I know ye well enough.

CAMILLO:
Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is half
flayed already.

AUTOLYCUS:
Are you in earnest, sir?
I smell the trick on't.

FLORIZEL:
Dispatch, I prithee.

AUTOLYCUS:
Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot with
conscience take it.

CAMILLO:
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Fortunate mistress,--let my prophecy
Come home to ye!--you must retire yourself
Into some covert: take your sweetheart's hat
And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,
Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken
The truth of your own seeming; that you may--
For I do fear eyes over--to shipboard
Get undescried.

PERDITA:
I see the play so lies
That I must bear a part.

CAMILLO:
No remedy.
Have you done there?

FLORIZEL:
Should I now meet my father,
He would not call me son.

CAMILLO:
Nay, you shall have no hat.
Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.

AUTOLYCUS:
Adieu, sir.

FLORIZEL:
O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!
Pray you, a word.

CAMILLO:

FLORIZEL:
Fortune speed us!
Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.

CAMILLO:
The swifter speed the better.

AUTOLYCUS:
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an
open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is
necessary for a cut-purse; a good nose is requisite
also, to smell out work for the other senses. I see
this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.
What an exchange had this been without boot! What
a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do
this year connive at us, and we may do any thing
extempore. The prince himself is about a piece of
iniquity, stealing away from his father with his
clog at his heels: if I thought it were a piece of
honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not
do't: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it;
and therein am I constant to my profession.
Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain:
every lane's end, every shop, church, session,
hanging, yields a careful man work.

Clown:
See, see; what a man you are now!
There is no other way but to tell the king
she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.

Shepherd:
Nay, but hear me.

Clown:
Nay, but hear me.

Shepherd:
Go to, then.

Clown:
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh
and blood has not offended the king; and so your
flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show
those things you found about her, those secret
things, all but what she has with her: this being
done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.

Shepherd:
I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his
son's pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man,
neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make
me the king's brother-in-law.

Clown:
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you
could have been to him and then your blood had been
the dearer by I know how much an ounce.

AUTOLYCUS:

Shepherd:
Well, let us to the king: there is that in this
fardel will make him scratch his beard.

AUTOLYCUS:

Clown:
Pray heartily he be at palace.

AUTOLYCUS:

Shepherd:
To the palace, an it like your worship.

AUTOLYCUS:
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition
of that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your
names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any
thing that is fitting to be known, discover.

Clown:
We are but plain fellows, sir.

AUTOLYCUS:
A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have no
lying: it becomes none but tradesmen, and they
often give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them for
it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; therefore
they do not give us the lie.

Clown:
Your worship had like to have given us one, if you
had not taken yourself with the manner.

Shepherd:
Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest
thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?
hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?
receives not thy nose court-odor from me? reflect I
not on thy baseness court-contempt? Thinkest thou,
for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy
business, I am therefore no courtier? I am courtier
cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck
back thy business there: whereupon I command thee to
open thy affair.

Shepherd:
My business, sir, is to the king.

AUTOLYCUS:
What advocate hast thou to him?

Shepherd:
I know not, an't like you.

Clown:
Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say you
have none.

Shepherd:
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.

AUTOLYCUS:
How blessed are we that are not simple men!
Yet nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.

Clown:
This cannot be but a great courtier.

Shepherd:
His garments are rich, but he wears
them not handsomely.

Clown:
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:
a great man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking
on's teeth.

AUTOLYCUS:
The fardel there? what's i' the fardel?
Wherefore that box?

Shepherd:
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,
which none must know but the king; and which he
shall know within this hour, if I may come to the
speech of him.

AUTOLYCUS:
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.

Shepherd:
Why, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
The king is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a
new ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for,
if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must
know the king is full of grief.

Shepard:
So 'tis said, sir; about his son, that should have
married a shepherd's daughter.

AUTOLYCUS:
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:
the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall
feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.

Clown:
Think you so, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy
and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to
him, though removed fifty times, shall all come
under the hangman: which though it be great pity,
yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a
ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into
grace! Some say he shall be stoned; but that death
is too soft for him, say I draw our throne into a
sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.

Clown:
Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear. an't
like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then
'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a
wasp's nest; then stand till he be three quarters
and a dram dead; then recovered again with
aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as
he is, and in the hottest day prognostication
proclaims, shall be be set against a brick-wall, the
sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he
is to behold him with flies blown to death. But what
talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries
are to be smiled at, their offences being so
capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain
men, what you have to the king: being something
gently considered, I'll bring you where he is
aboard, tender your persons to his presence,
whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man
besides the king to effect your suits, here is man
shall do it.

Clown:
He seems to be of great authority: close with him,
give him gold; and though authority be a stubborn
bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show
the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand,
and no more ado. Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'

Shepherd:
An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for
us, here is that gold I have: I'll make it as much
more and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.

AUTOLYCUS:
After I have done what I promised?

Shepherd:
Ay, sir.

AUTOLYCUS:
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?

Clown:
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful
one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.

AUTOLYCUS:
O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him,
he'll be made an example.

Clown:
Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show
our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your
daughter nor my sister; we are gone else. Sir, I
will give you as much as this old man does when the
business is performed, and remain, as he says, your
pawn till it be brought you.

AUTOLYCUS:
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side;
go on the right hand: I will but look upon the
hedge and follow you.

Clown:
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.

Shepherd:
Let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.

AUTOLYCUS:
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would
not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am
courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means
to do the prince my master good; which who knows how
that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring
these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him: if he
think it fit to shore them again and that the
complaint they have to the king concerns him
nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far
officious; for I am proof against that title and
what shame else belongs to't. To him will I present
them: there may be matter in it.

CLEOMENES:
Sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd
A saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make,
Which you have not redeem'd; indeed, paid down
More penitence than done trespass: at the last,
Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil;
With them forgive yourself.

LEONTES:
Whilst I remember
Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
The wrong I did myself; which was so much,
That heirless it hath made my kingdom and
Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man
Bred his hopes out of.

PAULINA:
True, too true, my lord:
If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
Or from the all that are took something good,
To make a perfect woman, she you kill'd
Would be unparallel'd.

LEONTES:
I think so. Kill'd!
She I kill'd! I did so: but thou strikest me
Sorely, to say I did; it is as bitter
Upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now,
Say so but seldom.

CLEOMENES:
Not at all, good lady:
You might have spoken a thousand things that would
Have done the time more benefit and graced
Your kindness better.

PAULINA:
You are one of those
Would have him wed again.

DION:
If you would not so,
You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
Of his most sovereign name; consider little
What dangers, by his highness' fail of issue,
May drop upon his kingdom and devour
Incertain lookers on. What were more holy
Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
What holier than, for royalty's repair,
For present comfort and for future good,
To bless the bed of majesty again
With a sweet fellow to't?

PAULINA:
There is none worthy,
Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods
Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes;
For has not the divine Apollo said,
Is't not the tenor of his oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an heir
Till his lost child be found? which that it shall,
Is all as monstrous to our human reason
As my Antigonus to break his grave
And come again to me; who, on my life,
Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel
My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills.
Care not for issue;
The crown will find an heir: great Alexander
Left his to the worthiest; so his successor
Was like to be the best.

LEONTES:
Good Paulina,
Who hast the memory of Hermione,
I know, in honour, O, that ever I
Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now,
I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,
Have taken treasure from her lips--

PAULINA:
And left them
More rich for what they yielded.

LEONTES:
Thou speak'st truth.
No more such wives; therefore, no wife: one worse,
And better used, would make her sainted spirit
Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
Where we're offenders now, appear soul-vex'd,
And begin, 'Why to me?'

PAULINA:
Had she such power,
She had just cause.

LEONTES:
She had; and would incense me
To murder her I married.

PAULINA:
I should so.
Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'ld bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't
You chose her; then I'ld shriek, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd
Should be 'Remember mine.'

LEONTES:
Stars, stars,
And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
I'll have no wife, Paulina.

PAULINA:
Will you swear
Never to marry but by my free leave?

LEONTES:
Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!

PAULINA:
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.

CLEOMENES:
You tempt him over-much.

PAULINA:
Unless another,
As like Hermione as is her picture,
Affront his eye.

CLEOMENES:
Good madam,--

PAULINA:
I have done.
Yet, if my lord will marry,--if you will, sir,
No remedy, but you will,--give me the office
To choose you a queen: she shall not be so young
As was your former; but she shall be such
As, walk'd your first queen's ghost,
it should take joy
To see her in your arms.

LEONTES:
My true Paulina,
We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.

PAULINA:
That
Shall be when your first queen's again in breath;
Never till then.

Gentleman:
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
Son of Polixenes, with his princess, she
The fairest I have yet beheld, desires access
To your high presence.

LEONTES:
What with him? he comes not
Like to his father's greatness: his approach,
So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
'Tis not a visitation framed, but forced
By need and accident. What train?

Gentleman:
But few,
And those but mean.

LEONTES:
His princess, say you, with him?

Gentleman:
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
That e'er the sun shone bright on.

PAULINA:
O Hermione,
As every present time doth boast itself
Above a better gone, so must thy grave
Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you yourself
Have said and writ so, but your writing now
Is colder than that theme, 'She had not been,
Nor was not to be equall'd;'--thus your verse
Flow'd with her beauty once: 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,
To say you have seen a better.

Gentleman:
Pardon, madam:
The one I have almost forgot,--your pardon,--
The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,
Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
Of all professors else, make proselytes
Of who she but bid follow.

PAULINA:
How! not women?

Gentleman:
Women will love her, that she is a woman
More worth than any man; men, that she is
The rarest of all women.

LEONTES:
Go, Cleomenes;
Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,
Bring them to our embracement. Still, 'tis strange
He thus should steal upon us.

PAULINA:
Had our prince,
Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd
Well with this lord: there was not full a month
Between their births.

LEONTES:
Prithee, no more; cease; thou know'st
He dies to me again when talk'd of: sure,
When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that which may
Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.
Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince;
For she did print your royal father off,
Conceiving you: were I but twenty-one,
Your father's image is so hit in you,
His very air, that I should call you brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By us perform'd before. Most dearly welcome!
And your fair princess,--goddess!--O, alas!
I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth
Might thus have stood begetting wonder as
You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost--
All mine own folly--the society,
Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
Though bearing misery, I desire my life
Once more to look on him.

FLORIZEL:
By his command
Have I here touch'd Sicilia and from him
Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
Can send his brother: and, but infirmity
Which waits upon worn times hath something seized
His wish'd ability, he had himself
The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his
Measured to look upon you; whom he loves--
He bade me say so--more than all the sceptres
And those that bear them living.

LEONTES:
O my brother,
Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir
Afresh within me, and these thy offices,
So rarely kind, are as interpreters
Of my behind-hand slackness. Welcome hither,
As is the spring to the earth. And hath he too
Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage,
At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
The adventure of her person?

FLORIZEL:
Good my lord,
She came from Libya.

LEONTES:
Where the warlike Smalus,
That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?

FLORIZEL:
Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter
His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her: thence,
A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,
To execute the charge my father gave me
For visiting your highness: my best train
I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libya, sir,
But my arrival and my wife's in safety
Here where we are.

LEONTES:
The blessed gods
Purge all infection from our air whilst you
Do climate here! You have a holy father,
A graceful gentleman; against whose person,
So sacred as it is, I have done sin:
For which the heavens, taking angry note,
Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,
As he from heaven merits it, with you
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on,
Such goodly things as you!

Lord:
Most noble sir,
That which I shall report will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
Bohemia greets you from himself by me;
Desires you to attach his son, who has--
His dignity and duty both cast off--
Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
A shepherd's daughter.

LEONTES:
Where's Bohemia? speak.

Lord:
Here in your city; I now came from him:
I speak amazedly; and it becomes
My marvel and my message. To your court
Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems,
Of this fair couple, meets he on the way
The father of this seeming lady and
Her brother, having both their country quitted
With this young prince.

FLORIZEL:
Camillo has betray'd me;
Whose honour and whose honesty till now
Endured all weathers.

Lord:
Lay't so to his charge:
He's with the king your father.

LEONTES:
Who? Camillo?

Lord:
Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
With divers deaths in death.

PERDITA:
O my poor father!
The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
Our contract celebrated.

LEONTES:
You are married?

FLORIZEL:
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;
The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:
The odds for high and low's alike.

LEONTES:
My lord,
Is this the daughter of a king?

FLORIZEL:
She is,
When once she is my wife.

LEONTES:
That 'once' I see by your good father's speed
Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
Most sorry, you have broken from his liking
Where you were tied in duty, and as sorry
Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
That you might well enjoy her.

FLORIZEL:
Dear, look up:
Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
Should chase us with my father, power no jot
Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir,
Remember since you owed no more to time
Than I do now: with thought of such affections,
Step forth mine advocate; at your request
My father will grant precious things as trifles.

LEONTES:
Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress,
Which he counts but a trifle.

PAULINA:
Sir, my liege,
Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month
'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes
Than what you look on now.

LEONTES:
I thought of her,
Even in these looks I made.
But your petition
Is yet unanswer'd. I will to your father:
Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,
I am friend to them and you: upon which errand
I now go toward him; therefore follow me
And mark what way I make: come, good my lord.

AUTOLYCUS:
Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?

First Gentleman:
I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old
shepherd deliver the manner how he found it:
whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were all
commanded out of the chamber; only this methought I
heard the shepherd say, he found the child.

AUTOLYCUS:
I would most gladly know the issue of it.

First Gentleman:
I make a broken delivery of the business; but the
changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were
very notes of admiration: they seemed almost, with
staring on one another, to tear the cases of their
eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language
in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard
of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable
passion of wonder appeared in them; but the wisest
beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not
say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the
extremity of the one, it must needs be.
Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.
The news, Rogero?

Second Gentleman:
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; the
king's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is
broken out within this hour that ballad-makers
cannot be able to express it.
Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward: he can
deliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this news
which is called true is so like an old tale, that
the verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the king
found his heir?

Third Gentleman:
Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by
circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you
see, there is such unity in the proofs. The mantle
of Queen Hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it,
the letters of Antigonus found with it which they
know to be his character, the majesty of the
creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection
of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding,
and many other evidences proclaim her with all
certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see
the meeting of the two kings?

Second Gentleman:
No.

Third Gentleman:
Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen,
cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one
joy crown another, so and in such manner that it
seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their
joy waded in tears. There was casting up of eyes,
holding up of hands, with countenances of such
distraction that they were to be known by garment,
not by favour. Our king, being ready to leap out of
himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that
joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy mother,
thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then
embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his
daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old
shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten
conduit of many kings' reigns. I never heard of such
another encounter, which lames report to follow it
and undoes description to do it.

Second Gentleman:
What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried
hence the child?

Third Gentleman:
Like an old tale still, which will have matter to
rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear
open. He was torn to pieces with a bear: this
avouches the shepherd's son; who has not only his
innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a
handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.

First Gentleman:
What became of his bark and his followers?

Third Gentleman:
Wrecked the same instant of their master's death and
in the view of the shepherd: so that all the
instruments which aided to expose the child were
even then lost when it was found. But O, the noble
combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in
Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of
her husband, another elevated that the oracle was
fulfilled: she lifted the princess from the earth,
and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin
her to her heart that she might no more be in danger
of losing.

First Gentleman:
The dignity of this act was worth the audience of
kings and princes; for by such was it acted.

Third Gentleman:
One of the prettiest touches of all and that which
angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not
the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen's
death, with the manner how she came to't bravely
confessed and lamented by the king, how
attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one
sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'Alas,'
I would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my
heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed
colour; some swooned, all sorrowed: if all the world
could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.

First Gentleman:
Are they returned to the court?

Third Gentleman:
No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue,
which is in the keeping of Paulina,--a piece many
years in doing and now newly performed by that rare
Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself
eternity and could put breath into his work, would
beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her
ape: he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that
they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of
answer: thither with all greediness of affection
are they gone, and there they intend to sup.

Second Gentleman:
I thought she had some great matter there in hand;
for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever
since the death of Hermione, visited that removed
house. Shall we thither and with our company piece
the rejoicing?

First Gentleman:
Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?
every wink of an eye some new grace will be born:
our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.
Let's along.

AUTOLYCUS:
Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me,
would preferment drop on my head. I brought the old
man and his son aboard the prince: told him I heard
them talk of a fardel and I know not what: but he
at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter,
so he then took her to be, who began to be much
sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of
weather continuing, this mystery remained
undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me; for had I
been the finder out of this secret, it would not
have relished among my other discredits.
Here come those I have done good to against my will,
and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.

Shepherd:
Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons and
daughters will be all gentlemen born.

Clown:
You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me
this other day, because I was no gentleman born.
See you these clothes? say you see them not and
think me still no gentleman born: you were best say
these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the
lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.

AUTOLYCUS:
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.

Clown:
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.

Shepherd:
And so have I, boy.

Clown:
So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my
father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and
called me brother; and then the two kings called my
father brother; and then the prince my brother and
the princess my sister called my father father; and
so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like
tears that ever we shed.

Shepherd:
We may live, son, to shed many more.

Clown:
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so
preposterous estate as we are.

AUTOLYCUS:
I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the
faults I have committed to your worship and to give
me your good report to the prince my master.

Shepherd:
Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are
gentlemen.

Clown:
Thou wilt amend thy life?

AUTOLYCUS:
Ay, an it like your good worship.

Clown:
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thou
art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.

Shepherd:
You may say it, but not swear it.

Clown:
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and
franklins say it, I'll swear it.

Shepherd:
How if it be false, son?

Clown:
If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear
it in the behalf of his friend: and I'll swear to
the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and
that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no
tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be
drunk: but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst
be a tall fellow of thy hands.

AUTOLYCUS:
I will prove so, sir, to my power.

Clown:
Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not
wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not
being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark! the kings
and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the
queen's picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy
good masters.

LEONTES:
O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
That I have had of thee!

PAULINA:
What, sovereign sir,
I did not well I meant well. All my services
You have paid home: but that you have vouchsafed,
With your crown'd brother and these your contracted
Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
It is a surplus of your grace, which never
My life may last to answer.

LEONTES:
O Paulina,
We honour you with trouble: but we came
To see the statue of our queen: your gallery
Have we pass'd through, not without much content
In many singularities; but we saw not
That which my daughter came to look upon,
The statue of her mother.

PAULINA:
As she lived peerless,
So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
Excels whatever yet you look'd upon
Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it
Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare
To see the life as lively mock'd as ever
Still sleep mock'd death: behold, and say 'tis well.
I like your silence, it the more shows off
Your wonder: but yet speak; first, you, my liege,
Comes it not something near?

LEONTES:
Her natural posture!
Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
In thy not chiding, for she was as tender
As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina,
Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
So aged as this seems.

POLIXENES:
O, not by much.

PAULINA:
So much the more our carver's excellence;
Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
As she lived now.

LEONTES:
As now she might have done,
So much to my good comfort, as it is
Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,
Even with such life of majesty, warm life,
As now it coldly stands, when first I woo'd her!
I am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me
For being more stone than it? O royal piece,
There's magic in thy majesty, which has
My evils conjured to remembrance and
From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
Standing like stone with thee.

PERDITA:
And give me leave,
And do not say 'tis superstition, that
I kneel and then implore her blessing. Lady,
Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours to kiss.

PAULINA:
O, patience!
The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's Not dry.

CAMILLO:
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
So many summers dry; scarce any joy
Did ever so long live; no sorrow
But kill'd itself much sooner.

POLIXENES:
Dear my brother,
Let him that was the cause of this have power
To take off so much grief from you as he
Will piece up in himself.

PAULINA:
Indeed, my lord,
If I had thought the sight of my poor image
Would thus have wrought you,--for the stone is mine--
I'ld not have show'd it.

LEONTES:
Do not draw the curtain.

PAULINA:
No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy
May think anon it moves.

LEONTES:
Let be, let be.
Would I were dead, but that, methinks, already--
What was he that did make it? See, my lord,
Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins
Did verily bear blood?

POLIXENES:
Masterly done:
The very life seems warm upon her lip.

LEONTES:
The fixture of her eye has motion in't,
As we are mock'd with art.

PAULINA:
I'll draw the curtain:
My lord's almost so far transported that
He'll think anon it lives.

LEONTES:
O sweet Paulina,
Make me to think so twenty years together!
No settled senses of the world can match
The pleasure of that madness. Let 't alone.

PAULINA:
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you: but
I could afflict you farther.

LEONTES:
Do, Paulina;
For this affliction has a taste as sweet
As any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,
There is an air comes from her: what fine chisel
Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
For I will kiss her.

PAULINA:
Good my lord, forbear:
The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;
You'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own
With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?

LEONTES:
No, not these twenty years.

PERDITA:
So long could I
Stand by, a looker on.

PAULINA:
Either forbear,
Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
For more amazement. If you can behold it,
I'll make the statue move indeed, descend
And take you by the hand; but then you'll think--
Which I protest against--I am assisted
By wicked powers.

LEONTES:
What you can make her do,
I am content to look on: what to speak,
I am content to hear; for 'tis as easy
To make her speak as move.

PAULINA:
It is required
You do awake your faith. Then all stand still;
On: those that think it is unlawful business
I am about, let them depart.

LEONTES:
Proceed:
No foot shall stir.

PAULINA:
Music, awake her; strike!
'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;
Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come,
I'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away,
Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs:
Start not; her actions shall be holy as
You hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her
Until you see her die again; for then
You kill her double. Nay, present your hand:
When she was young you woo'd her; now in age
Is she become the suitor?

LEONTES:
O, she's warm!
If this be magic, let it be an art
Lawful as eating.

POLIXENES:
She embraces him.

CAMILLO:
She hangs about his neck:
If she pertain to life let her speak too.

POLIXENES:
Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,
Or how stolen from the dead.

PAULINA:
That she is living,
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Like an old tale: but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
Please you to interpose, fair madam: kneel
And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady;
Our Perdita is found.

HERMIONE:
You gods, look down
And from your sacred vials pour your graces
Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own.
Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found
Thy father's court? for thou shalt hear that I,
Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
Myself to see the issue.

PAULINA:
There's time enough for that;
Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
Your joys with like relation. Go together,
You precious winners all; your exultation
Partake to every one. I, an old turtle,
Will wing me to some wither'd bough and there
My mate, that's never to be found again,
Lament till I am lost.

LEONTES:
O, peace, Paulina!
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a wife: this is a match,
And made between's by vows. Thou hast found mine;
But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,
As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many
A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far--
For him, I partly know his mind--to find thee
An honourable husband. Come, Camillo,
And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty
Is richly noted and here justified
By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place.
What! look upon my brother: both your pardons,
That e'er I put between your holy looks
My ill suspicion. This is your son-in-law,
And son unto the king, who, heavens directing,
Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,
Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely
Each one demand an answer to his part
Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first
We were dissever'd: hastily lead away.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Escalus.

ESCALUS:
My lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Of government the properties to unfold,
Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse;
Since I am put to know that your own science
Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
My strength can give you: then no more remains,
But that to your sufficiency, as your Worth is able,
And let them work. The nature of our people,
Our city's institutions, and the terms
For common justice, you're as pregnant in
As art and practise hath enriched any
That we remember. There is our commission,
From which we would not have you warp. Call hither,
I say, bid come before us Angelo.
What figure of us think you he will bear?
For you must know, we have with special soul
Elected him our absence to supply,
Lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love,
And given his deputation all the organs
Of our own power: what think you of it?

ESCALUS:
If any in Vienna be of worth
To undergo such ample grace and honour,
It is Lord Angelo.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Look where he comes.

ANGELO:
Always obedient to your grace's will,
I come to know your pleasure.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Angelo,
There is a kind of character in thy life,
That to the observer doth thy history
Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings
Are not thine own so proper as to waste
Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch'd
But to fine issues, nor Nature never lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence
But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Herself the glory of a creditor,
Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech
To one that can my part in him advertise;
Hold therefore, Angelo:--
In our remove be thou at full ourself;
Mortality and mercy in Vienna
Live in thy tongue and heart: old Escalus,
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
Take thy commission.

ANGELO:
Now, good my lord,
Let there be some more test made of my metal,
Before so noble and so great a figure
Be stamp'd upon it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No more evasion:
We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice
Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition
That it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd
Matters of needful value. We shall write to you,
As time and our concernings shall importune,
How it goes with us, and do look to know
What doth befall you here. So, fare you well;
To the hopeful execution do I leave you
Of your commissions.

ANGELO:
Yet give leave, my lord,
That we may bring you something on the way.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
My haste may not admit it;
Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do
With any scruple; your scope is as mine own
So to enforce or qualify the laws
As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand:
I'll privily away. I love the people,
But do not like to stage me to their eyes:
Through it do well, I do not relish well
Their loud applause and Aves vehement;
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.

ANGELO:
The heavens give safety to your purposes!

ESCALUS:
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!

DUKE:
I thank you. Fare you well.

ESCALUS:
I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
To look into the bottom of my place:
A power I have, but of what strength and nature
I am not yet instructed.

ANGELO:
'Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,
And we may soon our satisfaction have
Touching that point.

ESCALUS:
I'll wait upon your honour.

LUCIO:
If the duke with the other dukes come not to
composition with the King of Hungary, why then all
the dukes fall upon the king.

First Gentleman:
Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of
Hungary's!

Second Gentleman:
Amen.

LUCIO:
Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that
went to sea with the Ten Commandments, but scraped
one out of the table.

Second Gentleman:
'Thou shalt not steal'?

LUCIO:
Ay, that he razed.

First Gentleman:
Why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain and
all the rest from their functions: they put forth
to steal. There's not a soldier of us all, that, in
the thanksgiving before meat, do relish the petition
well that prays for peace.

Second Gentleman:
I never heard any soldier dislike it.

LUCIO:
I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where
grace was said.

Second Gentleman:
No? a dozen times at least.

First Gentleman:
What, in metre?

LUCIO:
In any proportion or in any language.

First Gentleman:
I think, or in any religion.

LUCIO:
Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all
controversy: as, for example, thou thyself art a
wicked villain, despite of all grace.

First Gentleman:
Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.

LUCIO:
I grant; as there may between the lists and the
velvet. Thou art the list.

First Gentleman:
And thou the velvet: thou art good velvet; thou'rt
a three-piled piece, I warrant thee: I had as lief
be a list of an English kersey as be piled, as thou
art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak
feelingly now?

LUCIO:
I think thou dost; and, indeed, with most painful
feeling of thy speech: I will, out of thine own
confession, learn to begin thy health; but, whilst I
live, forget to drink after thee.

First Gentleman:
I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?

Second Gentleman:
Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.

LUCIO:
Behold, behold. where Madam Mitigation comes! I
have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to--

Second Gentleman:
To what, I pray?

LUCIO:
Judge.

Second Gentleman:
To three thousand dolours a year.

First Gentleman:
Ay, and more.

LUCIO:
A French crown more.

First Gentleman:
Thou art always figuring diseases in me; but thou
art full of error; I am sound.

LUCIO:
Nay, not as one would say, healthy; but so sound as
things that are hollow: thy bones are hollow;
impiety has made a feast of thee.

First Gentleman:
How now! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Well, well; there's one yonder arrested and carried
to prison was worth five thousand of you all.

Second Gentleman:
Who's that, I pray thee?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Marry, sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.

First Gentleman:
Claudio to prison? 'tis not so.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Nay, but I know 'tis so: I saw him arrested, saw
him carried away; and, which is more, within these
three days his head to be chopped off.

LUCIO:
But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so.
Art thou sure of this?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
I am too sure of it: and it is for getting Madam
Julietta with child.

LUCIO:
Believe me, this may be: he promised to meet me two
hours since, and he was ever precise in
promise-keeping.

Second Gentleman:
Besides, you know, it draws something near to the
speech we had to such a purpose.

First Gentleman:
But, most of all, agreeing with the proclamation.

LUCIO:
Away! let's go learn the truth of it.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what
with the gallows and what with poverty, I am
custom-shrunk.
How now! what's the news with you?

POMPEY:
Yonder man is carried to prison.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Well; what has he done?

POMPEY:
A woman.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
But what's his offence?

POMPEY:
Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
What, is there a maid with child by him?

POMPEY:
No, but there's a woman with maid by him. You have
not heard of the proclamation, have you?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
What proclamation, man?

POMPEY:
All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
And what shall become of those in the city?

POMPEY:
They shall stand for seed: they had gone down too,
but that a wise burgher put in for them.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be
pulled down?

POMPEY:
To the ground, mistress.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!
What shall become of me?

POMPEY:
Come; fear you not: good counsellors lack no
clients: though you change your place, you need not
change your trade; I'll be your tapster still.
Courage! there will be pity taken on you: you that
have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you
will be considered.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
What's to do here, Thomas tapster? let's withdraw.

POMPEY:
Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to
prison; and there's Madam Juliet.

CLAUDIO:
Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?
Bear me to prison, where I am committed.

Provost:
I do it not in evil disposition,
But from Lord Angelo by special charge.

CLAUDIO:
Thus can the demigod Authority
Make us pay down for our offence by weight
The words of heaven; on whom it will, it will;
On whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.

LUCIO:
Why, how now, Claudio! whence comes this restraint?

CLAUDIO:
From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty:
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
So every scope by the immoderate use
Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,
Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
A thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.

LUCIO:
If could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would
send for certain of my creditors: and yet, to say
the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom
as the morality of imprisonment. What's thy
offence, Claudio?

CLAUDIO:
What but to speak of would offend again.

LUCIO:
What, is't murder?

CLAUDIO:
No.

LUCIO:
Lechery?

CLAUDIO:
Call it so.

Provost:
Away, sir! you must go.

CLAUDIO:
One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you.

LUCIO:
A hundred, if they'll do you any good.
Is lechery so look'd after?

CLAUDIO:
Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
I got possession of Julietta's bed:
You know the lady; she is fast my wife,
Save that we do the denunciation lack
Of outward order: this we came not to,
Only for propagation of a dower
Remaining in the coffer of her friends,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
Till time had made them for us. But it chances
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
With character too gross is writ on Juliet.

LUCIO:
With child, perhaps?

CLAUDIO:
Unhappily, even so.
And the new deputy now for the duke--
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
Or whether that the body public be
A horse whereon the governor doth ride,
Who, newly in the seat, that it may know
He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
Whether the tyranny be in his place,
Or in his emmence that fills it up,
I stagger in:--but this new governor
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
Which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by the wall
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round
And none of them been worn; and, for a name,
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act
Freshly on me: 'tis surely for a name.

LUCIO:
I warrant it is: and thy head stands so tickle on
thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love,
may sigh it off. Send after the duke and appeal to
him.

CLAUDIO:
I have done so, but he's not to be found.
I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:
This day my sister should the cloister enter
And there receive her approbation:
Acquaint her with the danger of my state:
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him:
I have great hope in that; for in her youth
There is a prone and speechless dialect,
Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art
When she will play with reason and discourse,
And well she can persuade.

LUCIO:
I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the
like, which else would stand under grievous
imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who I
would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a
game of tick-tack. I'll to her.

CLAUDIO:
I thank you, good friend Lucio.

LUCIO:
Within two hours.

CLAUDIO:
Come, officer, away!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No, holy father; throw away that thought;
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
Of burning youth.

FRIAR THOMAS:
May your grace speak of it?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
My holy sir, none better knows than you
How I have ever loved the life removed
And held in idle price to haunt assemblies
Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps.
I have deliver'd to Lord Angelo,
A man of stricture and firm abstinence,
My absolute power and place here in Vienna,
And he supposes me travell'd to Poland;
For so I have strew'd it in the common ear,
And so it is received. Now, pious sir,
You will demand of me why I do this?

FRIAR THOMAS:
Gladly, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
We have strict statutes and most biting laws.
The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds,
Which for this nineteen years we have let slip;
Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave,
That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
Having bound up the threatening twigs of birch,
Only to stick it in their children's sight
For terror, not to use, in time the rod
Becomes more mock'd than fear'd; so our decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead;
And liberty plucks justice by the nose;
The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
Goes all decorum.

FRIAR THOMAS:
It rested in your grace
To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased:
And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd
Than in Lord Angelo.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I do fear, too dreadful:
Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
For what I bid them do: for we bid this be done,
When evil deeds have their permissive pass
And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father,
I have on Angelo imposed the office;
Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home,
And yet my nature never in the fight
To do in slander. And to behold his sway,
I will, as 'twere a brother of your order,
Visit both prince and people: therefore, I prithee,
Supply me with the habit and instruct me
How I may formally in person bear me
Like a true friar. More reasons for this action
At our more leisure shall I render you;
Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise;
Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
That his blood flows, or that his appetite
Is more to bread than stone: hence shall we see,
If power change purpose, what our seemers be.

ISABELLA:
And have you nuns no farther privileges?

FRANCISCA:
Are not these large enough?

ISABELLA:
Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more;
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Who's that which calls?

FRANCISCA:
It is a man's voice. Gentle Isabella,
Turn you the key, and know his business of him;
You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn.
When you have vow'd, you must not speak with men
But in the presence of the prioress:
Then, if you speak, you must not show your face,
Or, if you show your face, you must not speak.
He calls again; I pray you, answer him.

ISABELLA:
Peace and prosperity! Who is't that calls

LUCIO:
Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
Proclaim you are no less! Can you so stead me
As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
A novice of this place and the fair sister
To her unhappy brother Claudio?

ISABELLA:
Why 'her unhappy brother'? let me ask,
The rather for I now must make you know
I am that Isabella and his sister.

LUCIO:
Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you:
Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.

ISABELLA:
Woe me! for what?

LUCIO:
For that which, if myself might be his judge,
He should receive his punishment in thanks:
He hath got his friend with child.

ISABELLA:
Sir, make me not your story.

LUCIO:
It is true.
I would not--though 'tis my familiar sin
With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest,
Tongue far from heart--play with all virgins so:
I hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted.
By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
And to be talk'd with in sincerity,
As with a saint.

ISABELLA:
You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.

LUCIO:
Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus:
Your brother and his lover have embraced:
As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.

ISABELLA:
Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet?

LUCIO:
Is she your cousin?

ISABELLA:
Adoptedly; as school-maids change their names
By vain though apt affection.

LUCIO:
She it is.

ISABELLA:
O, let him marry her.

LUCIO:
This is the point.
The duke is very strangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
In hand and hope of action: but we do learn
By those that know the very nerves of state,
His givings-out were of an infinite distance
From his true-meant design. Upon his place,
And with full line of his authority,
Governs Lord Angelo; a man whose blood
Is very snow-broth; one who never feels
The wanton stings and motions of the sense,
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
With profits of the mind, study and fast.
He--to give fear to use and liberty,
Which have for long run by the hideous law,
As mice by lions--hath pick'd out an act,
Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
Falls into forfeit: he arrests him on it;
And follows close the rigour of the statute,
To make him an example. All hope is gone,
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
To soften Angelo: and that's my pith of business
'Twixt you and your poor brother.

ISABELLA:
Doth he so seek his life?

LUCIO:
Has censured him
Already; and, as I hear, the provost hath
A warrant for his execution.

ISABELLA:
Alas! what poor ability's in me
To do him good?

LUCIO:
Assay the power you have.

ISABELLA:
My power? Alas, I doubt--

LUCIO:
Our doubts are traitors
And make us lose the good we oft might win
By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,
And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
All their petitions are as freely theirs
As they themselves would owe them.

ISABELLA:
I'll see what I can do.

LUCIO:
But speedily.

ISABELLA:
I will about it straight;
No longer staying but to give the mother
Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you:
Commend me to my brother: soon at night
I'll send him certain word of my success.

LUCIO:
I take my leave of you.

ISABELLA:
Good sir, adieu.

ANGELO:
We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape, till custom make it
Their perch and not their terror.

ESCALUS:
Ay, but yet
Let us be keen, and rather cut a little,
Than fall, and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman
Whom I would save, had a most noble father!
Let but your honour know,
Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,
That, in the working of your own affections,
Had time cohered with place or place with wishing,
Or that the resolute acting of your blood
Could have attain'd the effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life
Err'd in this point which now you censure him,
And pull'd the law upon you.

ANGELO:
'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,
Another thing to fall. I not deny,
The jury, passing on the prisoner's life,
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
Guiltier than him they try. What's open made to justice,
That justice seizes: what know the laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? 'Tis very pregnant,
The jewel that we find, we stoop and take't
Because we see it; but what we do not see
We tread upon, and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offence
For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
When I, that censure him, do so offend,
Let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.

ESCALUS:
Be it as your wisdom will.

ANGELO:
Where is the provost?

Provost:
Here, if it like your honour.

ANGELO:
See that Claudio
Be executed by nine to-morrow morning:
Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared;
For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.

ESCALUS:

ELBOW:
Come, bring them away: if these be good people in
a commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in
common houses, I know no law: bring them away.

ANGELO:
How now, sir! What's your name? and what's the matter?

ELBOW:
If it Please your honour, I am the poor duke's
constable, and my name is Elbow: I do lean upon
justice, sir, and do bring in here before your good
honour two notorious benefactors.

ANGELO:
Benefactors? Well; what benefactors are they? are
they not malefactors?

ELBOW:
If it? please your honour, I know not well what they
are: but precise villains they are, that I am sure
of; and void of all profanation in the world that
good Christians ought to have.

ESCALUS:
This comes off well; here's a wise officer.

ANGELO:
Go to: what quality are they of? Elbow is your
name? why dost thou not speak, Elbow?

POMPEY:
He cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.

ANGELO:
What are you, sir?

ELBOW:
He, sir! a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that
serves a bad woman; whose house, sir, was, as they
say, plucked down in the suburbs; and now she
professes a hot-house, which, I think, is a very ill house too.

ESCALUS:
How know you that?

ELBOW:
My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour,--

ESCALUS:
How? thy wife?

ELBOW:
Ay, sir; whom, I thank heaven, is an honest woman,--

ESCALUS:
Dost thou detest her therefore?

ELBOW:
I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as
she, that this house, if it be not a bawd's house,
it is pity of her life, for it is a naughty house.

ESCALUS:
How dost thou know that, constable?

ELBOW:
Marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman
cardinally given, might have been accused in
fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.

ESCALUS:
By the woman's means?

ELBOW:
Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone's means: but as she
spit in his face, so she defied him.

POMPEY:
Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.

ELBOW:
Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable
man; prove it.

ESCALUS:
Do you hear how he misplaces?

POMPEY:
Sir, she came in great with child; and longing,
saving your honour's reverence, for stewed prunes;
sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very
distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit-dish, a
dish of some three-pence; your honours have seen
such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very
good dishes,--

ESCALUS:
Go to, go to: no matter for the dish, sir.

POMPEY:
No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in
the right: but to the point. As I say, this
Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and
being great-bellied, and longing, as I said, for
prunes; and having but two in the dish, as I said,
Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the
rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them very
honestly; for, as you know, Master Froth, I could
not give you three-pence again.

FROTH:
No, indeed.

POMPEY:
Very well: you being then, if you be remembered,
cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes,--

FROTH:
Ay, so I did indeed.

POMPEY:
Why, very well; I telling you then, if you be
remembered, that such a one and such a one were past
cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very
good diet, as I told you,--

FROTH:
All this is true.

POMPEY:
Why, very well, then,--

ESCALUS:
Come, you are a tedious fool: to the purpose. What
was done to Elbow's wife, that he hath cause to
complain of? Come me to what was done to her.

POMPEY:
Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.

ESCALUS:
No, sir, nor I mean it not.

POMPEY:
Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's
leave. And, I beseech you, look into Master Froth
here, sir; a man of four-score pound a year; whose
father died at Hallowmas: was't not at Hallowmas,
Master Froth?

FROTH:
All-hallond eve.

POMPEY:
Why, very well; I hope here be truths. He, sir,
sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in
the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight
to sit, have you not?

FROTH:
I have so; because it is an open room and good for winter.

POMPEY:
Why, very well, then; I hope here be truths.

ANGELO:
This will last out a night in Russia,
When nights are longest there: I'll take my leave.
And leave you to the hearing of the cause;
Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.

ESCALUS:
I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.
Now, sir, come on: what was done to Elbow's wife, once more?

POMPEY:
Once, sir? there was nothing done to her once.

ELBOW:
I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.

POMPEY:
I beseech your honour, ask me.

ESCALUS:
Well, sir; what did this gentleman to her?

POMPEY:
I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face.
Good Master Froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a
good purpose. Doth your honour mark his face?

ESCALUS:
Ay, sir, very well.

POMPEY:
Nay; I beseech you, mark it well.

ESCALUS:
Well, I do so.

POMPEY:
Doth your honour see any harm in his face?

ESCALUS:
Why, no.

POMPEY:
I'll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst
thing about him. Good, then; if his face be the
worst thing about him, how could Master Froth do the
constable's wife any harm? I would know that of
your honour.

ESCALUS:
He's in the right. Constable, what say you to it?

ELBOW:
First, an it like you, the house is a respected
house; next, this is a respected fellow; and his
mistress is a respected woman.

POMPEY:
By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected
person than any of us all.

ELBOW:
Varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicked varlet! the
time has yet to come that she was ever respected
with man, woman, or child.

POMPEY:
Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.

ESCALUS:
Which is the wiser here? Justice or Iniquity? Is
this true?

ELBOW:
O thou caitiff! O thou varlet! O thou wicked
Hannibal! I respected with her before I was married
to her! If ever I was respected with her, or she
with me, let not your worship think me the poor
duke's officer. Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or
I'll have mine action of battery on thee.

ESCALUS:
If he took you a box o' the ear, you might have your
action of slander too.

ELBOW:
Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is't
your worship's pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?

ESCALUS:
Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him
that thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him
continue in his courses till thou knowest what they
are.

ELBOW:
Marry, I thank your worship for it. Thou seest, thou
wicked varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art
to continue now, thou varlet; thou art to continue.

ESCALUS:
Where were you born, friend?

FROTH:
Here in Vienna, sir.

ESCALUS:
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?

FROTH:
Yes, an't please you, sir.

ESCALUS:
So. What trade are you of, sir?

POMPHEY:
Tapster; a poor widow's tapster.

ESCALUS:
Your mistress' name?

POMPHEY:
Mistress Overdone.

ESCALUS:
Hath she had any more than one husband?

POMPEY:
Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.

ESCALUS:
Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master
Froth, I would not have you acquainted with
tapsters: they will draw you, Master Froth, and you
will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no
more of you.

FROTH:
I thank your worship. For mine own part, I never
come into any room in a tap-house, but I am drawn
in.

ESCALUS:
Well, no more of it, Master Froth: farewell.
Come you hither to me, Master tapster. What's your
name, Master tapster?

POMPEY:
Pompey.

ESCALUS:
What else?

POMPEY:
Bum, sir.

ESCALUS:
Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you;
so that in the beastliest sense you are Pompey the
Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey,
howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you
not? come, tell me true: it shall be the better for you.

POMPEY:
Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.

ESCALUS:
How would you live, Pompey? by being a bawd? What
do you think of the trade, Pompey? is it a lawful trade?

POMPEY:
If the law would allow it, sir.

ESCALUS:
But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall
not be allowed in Vienna.

POMPEY:
Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the
youth of the city?

ESCALUS:
No, Pompey.

POMPEY:
Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then.
If your worship will take order for the drabs and
the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.

ESCALUS:
There are pretty orders beginning, I can tell you:
it is but heading and hanging.

POMPEY:
If you head and hang all that offend that way but
for ten year together, you'll be glad to give out a
commission for more heads: if this law hold in
Vienna ten year, I'll rent the fairest house in it
after three-pence a bay: if you live to see this
come to pass, say Pompey told you so.

ESCALUS:
Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your
prophecy, hark you: I advise you, let me not find
you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever;
no, not for dwelling where you do: if I do, Pompey,
I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall
have you whipt: so, for this time, Pompey, fare you well.

POMPEY:
I thank your worship for your good counsel:
but I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall
better determine.
Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade:
The valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.

ESCALUS:
Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, Master
constable. How long have you been in this place of constable?

ELBOW:
Seven year and a half, sir.

ESCALUS:
I thought, by your readiness in the office, you had
continued in it some time. You say, seven years together?

ELBOW:
And a half, sir.

ESCALUS:
Alas, it hath been great pains to you. They do you
wrong to put you so oft upon 't: are there not men
in your ward sufficient to serve it?

ELBOW:
Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they
are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I
do it for some piece of money, and go through with
all.

ESCALUS:
Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven,
the most sufficient of your parish.

ELBOW:
To your worship's house, sir?

ESCALUS:
To my house. Fare you well.
What's o'clock, think you?

Justice:
Eleven, sir.

ESCALUS:
I pray you home to dinner with me.

Justice:
I humbly thank you.

ESCALUS:
It grieves me for the death of Claudio;
But there's no remedy.

Justice:
Lord Angelo is severe.

ESCALUS:
It is but needful:
Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so;
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe:
But yet,--poor Claudio! There is no remedy.
Come, sir.

Servant:
He's hearing of a cause; he will come straight
I'll tell him of you.

Provost:
Pray you, do.
I'll know
His pleasure; may be he will relent. Alas,
He hath but as offended in a dream!
All sects, all ages smack of this vice; and he
To die for't!

ANGELO:
Now, what's the matter. Provost?

Provost:
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?

ANGELO:
Did not I tell thee yea? hadst thou not order?
Why dost thou ask again?

Provost:
Lest I might be too rash:
Under your good correction, I have seen,
When, after execution, judgment hath
Repented o'er his doom.

ANGELO:
Go to; let that be mine:
Do you your office, or give up your place,
And you shall well be spared.

Provost:
I crave your honour's pardon.
What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
She's very near her hour.

ANGELO:
Dispose of her
To some more fitter place, and that with speed.

Servant:
Here is the sister of the man condemn'd
Desires access to you.

ANGELO:
Hath he a sister?

Provost:
Ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
If not already.

ANGELO:
Well, let her be admitted.
See you the fornicatress be removed:
Let have needful, but not lavish, means;
There shall be order for't.

Provost:
God save your honour!

ANGELO:
Stay a little while.
You're welcome: what's your will?

ISABELLA:
I am a woeful suitor to your honour,
Please but your honour hear me.

ANGELO:
Well; what's your suit?

ISABELLA:
There is a vice that most I do abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of justice;
For which I would not plead, but that I must;
For which I must not plead, but that I am
At war 'twixt will and will not.

ANGELO:
Well; the matter?

ISABELLA:
I have a brother is condemn'd to die:
I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
And not my brother.

Provost:

ANGELO:
Condemn the fault and not the actor of it?
Why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done:
Mine were the very cipher of a function,
To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
And let go by the actor.

ISABELLA:
O just but severe law!
I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Must he needs die?

ANGELO:
Maiden, no remedy.

ISABELLA:
Yes; I do think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.

ANGELO:
I will not do't.

ISABELLA:
But can you, if you would?

ANGELO:
Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.

ISABELLA:
But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse
As mine is to him?

ANGELO:
He's sentenced; 'tis too late.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Too late? why, no; I, that do speak a word.
May call it back again. Well, believe this,
No ceremony that to great ones 'longs,
Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword,
The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe,
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does.
If he had been as you and you as he,
You would have slipt like him; but he, like you,
Would not have been so stern.

ANGELO:
Pray you, be gone.

ISABELLA:
I would to heaven I had your potency,
And you were Isabel! should it then be thus?
No; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge,
And what a prisoner.

LUCIO:

ANGELO:
Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
And you but waste your words.

ISABELLA:
Alas, alas!
Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once;
And He that might the vantage best have took
Found out the remedy. How would you be,
If He, which is the top of judgment, should
But judge you as you are? O, think on that;
And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
Like man new made.

ANGELO:
Be you content, fair maid;
It is the law, not I condemn your brother:
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him: he must die tomorrow.

ISABELLA:
To-morrow! O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him!
He's not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens
We kill the fowl of season: shall we serve heaven
With less respect than we do minister
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you;
Who is it that hath died for this offence?
There's many have committed it.

LUCIO:

ANGELO:
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept:
Those many had not dared to do that evil,
If the first that did the edict infringe
Had answer'd for his deed: now 'tis awake
Takes note of what is done; and, like a prophet,
Looks in a glass, that shows what future evils,
Either new, or by remissness new-conceived,
And so in progress to be hatch'd and born,
Are now to have no successive degrees,
But, ere they live, to end.

ISABELLA:
Yet show some pity.

ANGELO:
I show it most of all when I show justice;
For then I pity those I do not know,
Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall;
And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your brother dies to-morrow; be content.

ISABELLA:
So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
And he, that suffer's. O, it is excellent
To have a giant's strength; but it is tyrannous
To use it like a giant.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Could great men thunder
As Jove himself does, Jove would ne'er be quiet,
For every pelting, petty officer
Would use his heaven for thunder;
Nothing but thunder! Merciful Heaven,
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt
Split'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
Than the soft myrtle: but man, proud man,
Drest in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he's most assured,
His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As make the angels weep; who, with our spleens,
Would all themselves laugh mortal.

LUCIO:

Provost:

ISABELLA:
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself:
Great men may jest with saints; 'tis wit in them,
But in the less foul profanation.

LUCIO:
Thou'rt i' the right, girl; more o, that.

ISABELLA:
That in the captain's but a choleric word,
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.

LUCIO:

ANGELO:
Why do you put these sayings upon me?

ISABELLA:
Because authority, though it err like others,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself,
That skins the vice o' the top. Go to your bosom;
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
That's like my brother's fault: if it confess
A natural guiltiness such as is his,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brother's life.

ANGELO:

ISABELLA:
Gentle my lord, turn back.

ANGELO:
I will bethink me: come again tomorrow.

ISABELLA:
Hark how I'll bribe you: good my lord, turn back.

ANGELO:
How! bribe me?

ISABELLA:
Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Not with fond shekels of the tested gold,
Or stones whose rates are either rich or poor
As fancy values them; but with true prayers
That shall be up at heaven and enter there
Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal.

ANGELO:
Well; come to me to-morrow.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Heaven keep your honour safe!

ANGELO:

ISABELLA:
At what hour to-morrow
Shall I attend your lordship?

ANGELO:
At any time 'fore noon.

ISABELLA:
'Save your honour!

ANGELO:
From thee, even from thy virtue!
What's this, what's this? Is this her fault or mine?
The tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
Ha!
Not she: nor doth she tempt: but it is I
That, lying by the violet in the sun,
Do as the carrion does, not as the flower,
Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
That modesty may more betray our sense
Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
Dost thou desire her foully for those things
That make her good? O, let her brother live!
Thieves for their robbery have authority
When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,
That I desire to hear her speak again,
And feast upon her eyes? What is't I dream on?
O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To sin in loving virtue: never could the strumpet,
With all her double vigour, art and nature,
Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid
Subdues me quite. Even till now,
When men were fond, I smiled and wonder'd how.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Hail to you, provost! so I think you are.

Provost:
I am the provost. What's your will, good friar?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Bound by my charity and my blest order,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
To let me see them and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.

Provost:
I would do more than that, if more were needful.
Look, here comes one: a gentlewoman of mine,
Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Hath blister'd her report: she is with child;
And he that got it, sentenced; a young man
More fit to do another such offence
Than die for this.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
When must he die?

Provost:
As I do think, to-morrow.
I have provided for you: stay awhile,
And you shall be conducted.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?

JULIET:
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
And try your penitence, if it be sound,
Or hollowly put on.

JULIET:
I'll gladly learn.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Love you the man that wrong'd you?

JULIET:
Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
So then it seems your most offenceful act
Was mutually committed?

JULIET:
Mutually.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.

JULIET:
I do confess it, and repent it, father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis meet so, daughter: but lest you do repent,
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always towards ourselves, not heaven,
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
But as we stand in fear,--

JULIET:
I do repent me, as it is an evil,
And take the shame with joy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
There rest.
Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow,
And I am going with instruction to him.
Grace go with you, Benedicite!

JULIET:
Must die to-morrow! O injurious love,
That respites me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror!

Provost:
'Tis pity of him.

ANGELO:
When I would pray and think, I think and pray
To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words;
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
Anchors on Isabel: Heaven in my mouth,
As if I did but only chew his name;
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
Of my conception. The state, whereon I studied
Is like a good thing, being often read,
Grown fear'd and tedious; yea, my gravity,
Wherein--let no man hear me--I take pride,
Could I with boot change for an idle plume,
Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
Wrench awe from fools and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood:
Let's write good angel on the devil's horn:
'Tis not the devil's crest.
How now! who's there?

Servant:
One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.

ANGELO:
Teach her the way.
O heavens!
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for itself,
And dispossessing all my other parts
Of necessary fitness?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
Come all to help him, and so stop the air
By which he should revive: and even so
The general, subject to a well-wish'd king,
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Must needs appear offence.
How now, fair maid?

ISABELLA:
I am come to know your pleasure.

ANGELO:
That you might know it, would much better please me
Than to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live.

ISABELLA:
Even so. Heaven keep your honour!

ANGELO:
Yet may he live awhile; and, it may be,
As long as you or I yet he must die.

ISABELLA:
Under your sentence?

ANGELO:
Yea.

ISABELLA:
When, I beseech you? that in his reprieve,
Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
That his soul sicken not.

ANGELO:
Ha! fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
To pardon him that hath from nature stolen
A man already made, as to remit
Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image
In stamps that are forbid: 'tis all as easy
Falsely to take away a life true made
As to put metal in restrained means
To make a false one.

ISABELLA:
'Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.

ANGELO:
Say you so? then I shall pose you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the most just law
Now took your brother's life; or, to redeem him,
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he hath stain'd?

ISABELLA:
Sir, believe this,
I had rather give my body than my soul.

ANGELO:
I talk not of your soul: our compell'd sins
Stand more for number than for accompt.

ISABELLA:
How say you?

ANGELO:
Nay, I'll not warrant that; for I can speak
Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
I, now the voice of the recorded law,
Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life:
Might there not be a charity in sin
To save this brother's life?

ISABELLA:
Please you to do't,
I'll take it as a peril to my soul,
It is no sin at all, but charity.

ANGELO:
Pleased you to do't at peril of your soul,
Were equal poise of sin and charity.

ISABELLA:
That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
Heaven let me bear it! you granting of my suit,
If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer
To have it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your answer.

ANGELO:
Nay, but hear me.
Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant,
Or seem so craftily; and that's not good.

ISABELLA:
Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better.

ANGELO:
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
When it doth tax itself; as these black masks
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder
Than beauty could, display'd. But mark me;
To be received plain, I'll speak more gross:
Your brother is to die.

ISABELLA:
So.

ANGELO:
And his offence is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the law upon that pain.

ISABELLA:
True.

ANGELO:
Admit no other way to save his life,--
As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
But in the loss of question,--that you, his sister,
Finding yourself desired of such a person,
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your brother from the manacles
Of the all-building law; and that there were
No earthly mean to save him, but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer;
What would you do?

ISABELLA:
As much for my poor brother as myself:
That is, were I under the terms of death,
The impression of keen whips I'ld wear as rubies,
And strip myself to death, as to a bed
That longing have been sick for, ere I'ld yield
My body up to shame.

ANGELO:
Then must your brother die.

ISABELLA:
And 'twere the cheaper way:
Better it were a brother died at once,
Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
Should die for ever.

ANGELO:
Were not you then as cruel as the sentence
That you have slander'd so?

ISABELLA:
Ignomy in ransom and free pardon
Are of two houses: lawful mercy
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.

ANGELO:
You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant;
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
A merriment than a vice.

ISABELLA:
O, pardon me, my lord; it oft falls out,
To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean:
I something do excuse the thing I hate,
For his advantage that I dearly love.

ANGELO:
We are all frail.

ISABELLA:
Else let my brother die,
If not a feodary, but only he
Owe and succeed thy weakness.

ANGELO:
Nay, women are frail too.

ISABELLA:
Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves;
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Women! Help Heaven! men their creation mar
In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail;
For we are soft as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints.

ANGELO:
I think it well:
And from this testimony of your own sex,--
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Than faults may shake our frames,--let me be bold;
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
That is, a woman; if you be more, you're none;
If you be one, as you are well express'd
By all external warrants, show it now,
By putting on the destined livery.

ISABELLA:
I have no tongue but one: gentle my lord,
Let me entreat you speak the former language.

ANGELO:
Plainly conceive, I love you.

ISABELLA:
My brother did love Juliet,
And you tell me that he shall die for it.

ANGELO:
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.

ISABELLA:
I know your virtue hath a licence in't,
Which seems a little fouler than it is,
To pluck on others.

ANGELO:
Believe me, on mine honour,
My words express my purpose.

ISABELLA:
Ha! little honour to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
I will proclaim thee, Angelo; look for't:
Sign me a present pardon for my brother,
Or with an outstretch'd throat I'll tell the world aloud
What man thou art.

ANGELO:
Who will believe thee, Isabel?
My unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place i' the state,
Will so your accusation overweigh,
That you shall stifle in your own report
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race the rein:
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes,
That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother
By yielding up thy body to my will;
Or else he must not only die the death,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To lingering sufferance. Answer me to-morrow,
Or, by the affection that now guides me most,
I'll prove a tyrant to him. As for you,
Say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true.

ISABELLA:
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths,
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue,
Either of condemnation or approof;
Bidding the law make court'sy to their will:
Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite,
To follow as it draws! I'll to my brother:
Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour.
That, had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, he'ld yield them up,
Before his sister should her body stoop
To such abhorr'd pollution.
Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die:
More than our brother is our chastity.
I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request,
And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?

CLAUDIO:
The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope:
I've hope to live, and am prepared to die.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Be absolute for death; either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
That none but fools would keep: a breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyey influences,
That dost this habitation, where thou keep'st,
Hourly afflict: merely, thou art death's fool;
For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun
And yet runn'st toward him still. Thou art not noble;
For all the accommodations that thou bear'st
Are nursed by baseness. Thou'rt by no means valiant;
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou oft provokest; yet grossly fear'st
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself;
For thou exist'st on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not;
For what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get,
And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain;
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor;
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
Thou bear's thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
For thine own bowels, which do call thee sire,
The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum,
For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep,
Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
To make thy riches pleasant. What's yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid moe thousand deaths: yet death we fear,
That makes these odds all even.

CLAUDIO:
I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die;
And, seeking death, find life: let it come on.

ISABELLA:

Provost:
Who's there? come in: the wish deserves a welcome.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.

CLAUDIO:
Most holy sir, I thank you.

ISABELLA:
My business is a word or two with Claudio.

Provost:
And very welcome. Look, signior, here's your sister.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Provost, a word with you.

Provost:
As many as you please.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.

CLAUDIO:
Now, sister, what's the comfort?

ISABELLA:
Why,
As all comforts are; most good, most good indeed.
Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
Intends you for his swift ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger:
Therefore your best appointment make with speed;
To-morrow you set on.

CLAUDIO:
Is there no remedy?

ISABELLA:
None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
To cleave a heart in twain.

CLAUDIO:
But is there any?

ISABELLA:
Yes, brother, you may live:
There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
If you'll implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death.

CLAUDIO:
Perpetual durance?

ISABELLA:
Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,
Though all the world's vastidity you had,
To a determined scope.

CLAUDIO:
But in what nature?

ISABELLA:
In such a one as, you consenting to't,
Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
And leave you naked.

CLAUDIO:
Let me know the point.

ISABELLA:
O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake,
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Than a perpetual honour. Darest thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension;
And the poor beetle, that we tread upon,
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
As when a giant dies.

CLAUDIO:
Why give you me this shame?
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flowery tenderness? If I must die,
I will encounter darkness as a bride,
And hug it in mine arms.

ISABELLA:
There spake my brother; there my father's grave
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
Whose settled visage and deliberate word
Nips youth i' the head and follies doth emmew
As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil
His filth within being cast, he would appear
A pond as deep as hell.

CLAUDIO:
The prenzie Angelo!

ISABELLA:
O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell,
The damned'st body to invest and cover
In prenzie guards! Dost thou think, Claudio?
If I would yield him my virginity,
Thou mightst be freed.

CLAUDIO:
O heavens! it cannot be.

ISABELLA:
Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence,
So to offend him still. This night's the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou diest to-morrow.

CLAUDIO:
Thou shalt not do't.

ISABELLA:
O, were it but my life,
I'ld throw it down for your deliverance
As frankly as a pin.

CLAUDIO:
Thanks, dear Isabel.

ISABELLA:
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.

CLAUDIO:
Yes. Has he affections in him,
That thus can make him bite the law by the nose,
When he would force it? Sure, it is no sin,
Or of the deadly seven, it is the least.

ISABELLA:
Which is the least?

CLAUDIO:
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurably fined? O Isabel!

ISABELLA:
What says my brother?

CLAUDIO:
Death is a fearful thing.

ISABELLA:
And shamed life a hateful.

CLAUDIO:
Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction and to rot;
This sensible warm motion to become
A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;
To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and incertain thought
Imagine howling: 'tis too horrible!
The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That age, ache, penury and imprisonment
Can lay on nature is a paradise
To what we fear of death.

ISABELLA:
Alas, alas!

CLAUDIO:
Sweet sister, let me live:
What sin you do to save a brother's life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far
That it becomes a virtue.

ISABELLA:
O you beast!
O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
Is't not a kind of incest, to take life
From thine own sister's shame? What should I think?
Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Ne'er issued from his blood. Take my defiance!
Die, perish! Might but my bending down
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed:
I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
No word to save thee.

CLAUDIO:
Nay, hear me, Isabel.

ISABELLA:
O, fie, fie, fie!
Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd:
'Tis best thou diest quickly.

CLAUDIO:
O hear me, Isabella!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.

ISABELLA:
What is your will?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and
by have some speech with you: the satisfaction I
would require is likewise your own benefit.

ISABELLA:
I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be
stolen out of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Son, I have overheard what hath passed between you
and your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to
corrupt her; only he hath made an essay of her
virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition
of natures: she, having the truth of honour in her,
hath made him that gracious denial which he is most
glad to receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I
know this to be true; therefore prepare yourself to
death: do not satisfy your resolution with hopes
that are fallible: tomorrow you must die; go to
your knees and make ready.

CLAUDIO:
Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love
with life that I will sue to be rid of it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Hold you there: farewell.
Provost, a word with you!

Provost:
What's your will, father

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me
awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my
habit no loss shall touch her by my company.

Provost:
In good time.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good:
the goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty
brief in goodness; but grace, being the soul of
your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever
fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you,
fortune hath conveyed to my understanding; and, but
that frailty hath examples for his falling, I should
wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this
substitute, and to save your brother?

ISABELLA:
I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my
brother die by the law than my son should be
unlawfully born. But, O, how much is the good duke
deceived in Angelo! If ever he return and I can
speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or
discover his government.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That shall not be much amiss: Yet, as the matter
now stands, he will avoid your accusation; he made
trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my
advisings: to the love I have in doing good a
remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe
that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged
lady a merited benefit; redeem your brother from
the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious
person; and much please the absent duke, if
peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of
this business.

ISABELLA:
Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to do
anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have
you not heard speak of Mariana, the sister of
Frederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea?

ISABELLA:
I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
She should this Angelo have married; was affianced
to her by oath, and the nuptial appointed: between
which time of the contract and limit of the
solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea,
having in that perished vessel the dowry of his
sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the
poor gentlewoman: there she lost a noble and
renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most
kind and natural; with him, the portion and sinew of
her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her
combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.

ISABELLA:
Can this be so? did Angelo so leave her?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them
with his comfort; swallowed his vows whole,
pretending in her discoveries of dishonour: in few,
bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet
wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears,
is washed with them, but relents not.

ISABELLA:
What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid
from the world! What corruption in this life, that
it will let this man live! But how out of this can she avail?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is a rupture that you may easily heal: and the
cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps
you from dishonour in doing it.

ISABELLA:
Show me how, good father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance
of her first affection: his unjust unkindness, that
in all reason should have quenched her love, hath,
like an impediment in the current, made it more
violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his
requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with
his demands to the point; only refer yourself to
this advantage, first, that your stay with him may
not be long; that the time may have all shadow and
silence in it; and the place answer to convenience.
This being granted in course,--and now follows
all,--we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up
your appointment, go in your place; if the encounter
acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him to
her recompense: and here, by this, is your brother
saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana
advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid
will I frame and make fit for his attempt. If you
think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness
of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof.
What think you of it?

ISABELLA:
The image of it gives me content already; and I
trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily
to Angelo: if for this night he entreat you to his
bed, give him promise of satisfaction. I will
presently to Saint Luke's: there, at the moated
grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that
place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that
it may be quickly.

ISABELLA:
I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.

ELBOW:
Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will
needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we
shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O heavens! what stuff is here

POMPEY:
'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the
merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by
order of law a furred gown to keep him warm; and
furred with fox and lamb-skins too, to signify, that
craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.

ELBOW:
Come your way, sir. 'Bless you, good father friar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
And you, good brother father. What offence hath
this man made you, sir?

ELBOW:
Marry, sir, he hath offended the law: and, sir, we
take him to be a thief too, sir; for we have found
upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which we have
sent to the deputy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Fie, sirrah! a bawd, a wicked bawd!
The evil that thou causest to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
From such a filthy vice: say to thyself,
From their abominable and beastly touches
I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.
Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.

POMPEY:
Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet,
sir, I would prove--

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer:
Correction and instruction must both work
Ere this rude beast will profit.

ELBOW:
He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him
warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if
he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were
as good go a mile on his errand.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That we were all, as some would seem to be,
From our faults, as faults from seeming, free!

ELBOW:
His neck will come to your waist,--a cord, sir.

POMPEY:
I spy comfort; I cry bail. Here's a gentleman and a
friend of mine.

LUCIO:
How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of
Caesar? art thou led in triumph? What, is there
none of Pygmalion's images, newly made woman, to be
had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and
extracting it clutch'd? What reply, ha? What
sayest thou to this tune, matter and method? Is't
not drowned i' the last rain, ha? What sayest
thou, Trot? Is the world as it was, man? Which is
the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The
trick of it?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Still thus, and thus; still worse!

LUCIO:
How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she
still, ha?

POMPEY:
Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she
is herself in the tub.

LUCIO:
Why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be
so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd:
an unshunned consequence; it must be so. Art going
to prison, Pompey?

POMPEY:
Yes, faith, sir.

LUCIO:
Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell: go, say I
sent thee thither. For debt, Pompey? or how?

ELBOW:
For being a bawd, for being a bawd.

LUCIO:
Well, then, imprison him: if imprisonment be the
due of a bawd, why, 'tis his right: bawd is he
doubtless, and of antiquity too; bawd-born.
Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison,
Pompey: you will turn good husband now, Pompey; you
will keep the house.

POMPEY:
I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.

LUCIO:
No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear.
I will pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage: If
you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the
more. Adieu, trusty Pompey. 'Bless you, friar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
And you.

LUCIO:
Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?

ELBOW:
Come your ways, sir; come.

POMPEY:
You will not bail me, then, sir?

LUCIO:
Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar?
what news?

ELBOW:
Come your ways, sir; come.

LUCIO:
Go to kennel, Pompey; go.
What news, friar, of the duke?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I know none. Can you tell me of any?

LUCIO:
Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other
some, he is in Rome: but where is he, think you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.

LUCIO:
It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from
the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born
to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence; he
puts transgression to 't.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He does well in 't.

LUCIO:
A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in
him: something too crabbed that way, friar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.

LUCIO:
Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred;
it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp
it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put
down. They say this Angelo was not made by man and
woman after this downright way of creation: is it
true, think you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
How should he be made, then?

LUCIO:
Some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he
was begot between two stock-fishes. But it is
certain that when he makes water his urine is
congealed ice; that I know to be true: and he is a
motion generative; that's infallible.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.

LUCIO:
Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the
rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a
man! Would the duke that is absent have done this?
Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a
hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing
a thousand: he had some feeling of the sport: he
knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I never heard the absent duke much detected for
women; he was not inclined that way.

LUCIO:
O, sir, you are deceived.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis not possible.

LUCIO:
Who, not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty; and
his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish: the
duke had crotchets in him. He would be drunk too;
that let me inform you.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You do him wrong, surely.

LUCIO:
Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the
duke: and I believe I know the cause of his
withdrawing.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What, I prithee, might be the cause?

LUCIO:
No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be locked within the
teeth and the lips: but this I can let you
understand, the greater file of the subject held the
duke to be wise.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Wise! why, no question but he was.

LUCIO:
A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Either this is the envy in you, folly, or mistaking:
the very stream of his life and the business he hath
helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better
proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own
bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the
envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier.
Therefore you speak unskilfully: or if your
knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.

LUCIO:
Sir, I know him, and I love him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with
dearer love.

LUCIO:
Come, sir, I know what I know.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I can hardly believe that, since you know not what
you speak. But, if ever the duke return, as our
prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your
answer before him. If it be honest you have spoke,
you have courage to maintain it: I am bound to call
upon you; and, I pray you, your name?

LUCIO:
Sir, my name is Lucio; well known to the duke.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to
report you.

LUCIO:
I fear you not.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, you hope the duke will return no more; or you
imagine me too unhurtful an opposite. But indeed I
can do you little harm; you'll forswear this again.

LUCIO:
I'll be hanged first: thou art deceived in me,
friar. But no more of this. Canst thou tell if
Claudio die to-morrow or no?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Why should he die, sir?

LUCIO:
Why? For filling a bottle with a tundish. I would
the duke we talk of were returned again: the
ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with
continency; sparrows must not build in his
house-eaves, because they are lecherous. The duke
yet would have dark deeds darkly answered; he would
never bring them to light: would he were returned!
Marry, this Claudio is condemned for untrussing.
Farewell, good friar: I prithee, pray for me. The
duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on
Fridays. He's not past it yet, and I say to thee,
he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown
bread and garlic: say that I said so. Farewell.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No might nor greatness in mortality
Can censure 'scape; back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
But who comes here?

ESCALUS:
Go; away with her to prison!

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Good my lord, be good to me; your honour is accounted
a merciful man; good my lord.

ESCALUS:
Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in
the same kind! This would make mercy swear and play
the tyrant.

Provost:
A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please
your honour.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me.
Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the
duke's time; he promised her marriage: his child
is a year and a quarter old, come Philip and Jacob:
I have kept it myself; and see how he goes about to abuse me!

ESCALUS:
That fellow is a fellow of much licence: let him be
called before us. Away with her to prison! Go to;
no more words.
Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered;
Claudio must die to-morrow: let him be furnished
with divines, and have all charitable preparation.
if my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be
so with him.

Provost:
So please you, this friar hath been with him, and
advised him for the entertainment of death.

ESCALUS:
Good even, good father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Bliss and goodness on you!

ESCALUS:
Of whence are you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not of this country, though my chance is now
To use it for my time: I am a brother
Of gracious order, late come from the See
In special business from his holiness.

ESCALUS:
What news abroad i' the world?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
None, but that there is so great a fever on
goodness, that the dissolution of it must cure it:
novelty is only in request; and it is as dangerous
to be aged in any kind of course, as it is virtuous
to be constant in any undertaking. There is scarce
truth enough alive to make societies secure; but
security enough to make fellowships accurst: much
upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. This
news is old enough, yet it is every day's news. I
pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke?

ESCALUS:
One that, above all other strifes, contended
especially to know himself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What pleasure was he given to?

ESCALUS:
Rather rejoicing to see another merry, than merry at
any thing which professed to make him rejoice: a
gentleman of all temperance. But leave we him to
his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous;
and let me desire to know how you find Claudio
prepared. I am made to understand that you have
lent him visitation.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He professes to have received no sinister measure
from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself
to the determination of justice: yet had he framed
to himself, by the instruction of his frailty, many
deceiving promises of life; which I by my good
leisure have discredited to him, and now is he
resolved to die.

ESCALUS:
You have paid the heavens your function, and the
prisoner the very debt of your calling. I have
laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest
shore of my modesty: but my brother justice have I
found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him
he is indeed Justice.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
If his own life answer the straitness of his
proceeding, it shall become him well; wherein if he
chance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.

ESCALUS:
I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Peace be with you!
He who the sword of heaven will bear
Should be as holy as severe;
Pattern in himself to know,
Grace to stand, and virtue go;
More nor less to others paying
Than by self-offences weighing.
Shame to him whose cruel striking
Kills for faults of his own liking!
Twice treble shame on Angelo,
To weed my vice and let his grow!
O, what may man within him hide,
Though angel on the outward side!
How may likeness made in crimes,
Making practise on the times,
To draw with idle spiders' strings
Most ponderous and substantial things!
Craft against vice I must apply:
With Angelo to-night shall lie
His old betrothed but despised;
So disguise shall, by the disguised,
Pay with falsehood false exacting,
And perform an old contracting.


MARIANA:
Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away:
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
Hath often still'd my brawling discontent.
I cry you mercy, sir; and well could wish
You had not found me here so musical:
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
To make bad good, and good provoke to harm.
I pray, you, tell me, hath any body inquired
for me here to-day? much upon this time have
I promised here to meet.

MARIANA:
You have not been inquired after:
I have sat here all day.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I do constantly believe you. The time is come even
now. I shall crave your forbearance a little: may
be I will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.

MARIANA:
I am always bound to you.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Very well met, and well come.
What is the news from this good deputy?

ISABELLA:
He hath a garden circummured with brick,
Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd;
And to that vineyard is a planched gate,
That makes his opening with this bigger key:
This other doth command a little door
Which from the vineyard to the garden leads;
There have I made my promise
Upon the heavy middle of the night
To call upon him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?

ISABELLA:
I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't:
With whispering and most guilty diligence,
In action all of precept, he did show me
The way twice o'er.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Are there no other tokens
Between you 'greed concerning her observance?

ISABELLA:
No, none, but only a repair i' the dark;
And that I have possess'd him my most stay
Can be but brief; for I have made him know
I have a servant comes with me along,
That stays upon me, whose persuasion is
I come about my brother.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis well borne up.
I have not yet made known to Mariana
A word of this. What, ho! within! come forth!
I pray you, be acquainted with this maid;
She comes to do you good.

ISABELLA:
I do desire the like.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?

MARIANA:
Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
Who hath a story ready for your ear.
I shall attend your leisure: but make haste;
The vaporous night approaches.

MARIANA:
Will't please you walk aside?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O place and greatness! millions of false eyes
Are stuck upon thee: volumes of report
Run with these false and most contrarious quests
Upon thy doings: thousand escapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dreams
And rack thee in their fancies.
Welcome, how agreed?

ISABELLA:
She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
If you advise it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is not my consent,
But my entreaty too.

ISABELLA:
Little have you to say
When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
'Remember now my brother.'

MARIANA:
Fear me not.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
He is your husband on a pre-contract:
To bring you thus together, 'tis no sin,
Sith that the justice of your title to him
Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go:
Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.

Provost:
Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?

POMPEY:
If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a
married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never
cut off a woman's head.

Provost:
Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a
direct answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio
and Barnardine. Here is in our prison a common
executioner, who in his office lacks a helper: if
you will take it on you to assist him, it shall
redeem you from your gyves; if not, you shall have
your full time of imprisonment and your deliverance
with an unpitied whipping, for you have been a
notorious bawd.

POMPEY:
Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind;
but yet I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I
would be glad to receive some instruction from my
fellow partner.

Provost:
What, ho! Abhorson! Where's Abhorson, there?

ABHORSON:
Do you call, sir?

Provost:
Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in
your execution. If you think it meet, compound with
him by the year, and let him abide here with you; if
not, use him for the present and dismiss him. He
cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath been a bawd.

ABHORSON:
A bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our mystery.

Provost:
Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn
the scale.

POMPEY:
Pray, sir, by your good favour,--for surely, sir, a
good favour you have, but that you have a hanging
look,--do you call, sir, your occupation a mystery?

ABHORSON:
Ay, sir; a mystery

POMPEY:
Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and
your whores, sir, being members of my occupation,
using painting, do prove my occupation a mystery:
but what mystery there should be in hanging, if I
should be hanged, I cannot imagine.

ABHORSON:
Sir, it is a mystery.

POMPEY:
Proof?

ABHORSON:
Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be
too little for your thief, your true man thinks it
big enough; if it be too big for your thief, your
thief thinks it little enough: so every true man's
apparel fits your thief.

Provost:
Are you agreed?

POMPEY:
Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is
a more penitent trade than your bawd; he doth
oftener ask forgiveness.

Provost:
You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe
to-morrow four o'clock.

ABHORSON:
Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.

POMPEY:
I do desire to learn, sir: and I hope, if you have
occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find
me yare; for truly, sir, for your kindness I owe you
a good turn.

Provost:
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio:
The one has my pity; not a jot the other,
Being a murderer, though he were my brother.
Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death:
'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?

CLAUDIO:
As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones:
He will not wake.

Provost:
Who can do good on him?
Well, go, prepare yourself.
But, hark, what noise?
Heaven give your spirits comfort!
By and by.
I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
For the most gentle Claudio.
Welcome father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The best and wholesomest spirts of the night
Envelope you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late?

Provost:
None, since the curfew rung.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not Isabel?

Provost:
No.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
They will, then, ere't be long.

Provost:
What comfort is for Claudio?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
There's some in hope.

Provost:
It is a bitter deputy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
Even with the stroke and line of his great justice:
He doth with holy abstinence subdue
That in himself which he spurs on his power
To qualify in others: were he meal'd with that
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
But this being so, he's just.
Now are they come.
This is a gentle provost: seldom when
The steeled gaoler is the friend of men.
How now! what noise? That spirit's possessed with haste
That wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.

Provost:
There he must stay until the officer
Arise to let him in: he is call'd up.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
But he must die to-morrow?

Provost:
None, sir, none.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
As near the dawning, provost, as it is,
You shall hear more ere morning.

Provost:
Happily
You something know; yet I believe there comes
No countermand; no such example have we:
Besides, upon the very siege of justice
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
Profess'd the contrary.
This is his lordship's man.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
And here comes Claudio's pardon.

Messenger:

Provost:
I shall obey him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:

Provost:
I told you. Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss
in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted
putting-on; methinks strangely, for he hath not used it before.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Pray you, let's hear.

Provost:

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in the
afternoon?

Provost:
A Bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred; one
that is a prisoner nine years old.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
How came it that the absent duke had not either
delivered him to his liberty or executed him? I
have heard it was ever his manner to do so.

Provost:
His friends still wrought reprieves for him: and,
indeed, his fact, till now in the government of Lord
Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is now apparent?

Provost:
Most manifest, and not denied by himself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Hath he born himself penitently in prison? how
seems he to be touched?

Provost:
A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but
as a drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless
of what's past, present, or to come; insensible of
mortality, and desperately mortal.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He wants advice.

Provost:
He will hear none: he hath evermore had the liberty
of the prison; give him leave to escape hence, he
would not: drunk many times a day, if not many days
entirely drunk. We have very oft awaked him, as if
to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming
warrant for it: it hath not moved him at all.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
More of him anon. There is written in your brow,
provost, honesty and constancy: if I read it not
truly, my ancient skill beguiles me; but, in the
boldness of my cunning, I will lay myself in hazard.
Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is
no greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath
sentenced him. To make you understand this in a
manifested effect, I crave but four days' respite;
for the which you are to do me both a present and a
dangerous courtesy.

Provost:
Pray, sir, in what?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
In the delaying death.

Provost:
A lack, how may I do it, having the hour limited,
and an express command, under penalty, to deliver
his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case
as Claudio's, to cross this in the smallest.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
By the vow of mine order I warrant you, if my
instructions may be your guide. Let this Barnardine
be this morning executed, and his head born to Angelo.

Provost:
Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it.
Shave the head, and tie the beard; and say it was
the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his
death: you know the course is common. If any thing
fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good
fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead
against it with my life.

Provost:
Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?

Provost:
To him, and to his substitutes.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You will think you have made no offence, if the duke
avouch the justice of your dealing?

Provost:
But what likelihood is in that?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see
you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor
persuasion can with ease attempt you, I will go
further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you.
Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the
duke: you know the character, I doubt not; and the
signet is not strange to you.

Provost:
I know them both.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The contents of this is the return of the duke: you
shall anon over-read it at your pleasure; where you
shall find, within these two days he will be here.
This is a thing that Angelo knows not; for he this
very day receives letters of strange tenor;
perchance of the duke's death; perchance entering
into some monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what
is writ. Look, the unfolding star calls up the
shepherd. Put not yourself into amazement how these
things should be: all difficulties are but easy
when they are known. Call your executioner, and off
with Barnardine's head: I will give him a present
shrift and advise him for a better place. Yet you
are amazed; but this shall absolutely resolve you.
Come away; it is almost clear dawn.

POMPEY:
I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house
of profession: one would think it were Mistress
Overdone's own house, for here be many of her old
customers. First, here's young Master Rash; he's in
for a commodity of brown paper and old ginger,
ninescore and seventeen pounds; of which he made
five marks, ready money: marry, then ginger was not
much in request, for the old women were all dead.
Then is there here one Master Caper, at the suit of
Master Three-pile the mercer, for some four suits of
peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a
beggar. Then have we here young Dizy, and young
Master Deep-vow, and Master Copperspur, and Master
Starve-lackey the rapier and dagger man, and young
Drop-heir that killed lusty Pudding, and Master
Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shooty the
great traveller, and wild Half-can that stabbed
Pots, and, I think, forty more; all great doers in
our trade, and are now 'for the Lord's sake.'

ABHORSON:
Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.

POMPEY:
Master Barnardine! you must rise and be hanged.
Master Barnardine!

ABHORSON:
What, ho, Barnardine!

BARNARDINE:

POMPEY:
Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so
good, sir, to rise and be put to death.

BARNARDINE:

ABHORSON:
Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.

POMPEY:
Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are
executed, and sleep afterwards.

ABHORSON:
Go in to him, and fetch him out.

POMPEY:
He is coming, sir, he is coming; I hear his straw rustle.

ABHORSON:
Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?

POMPEY:
Very ready, sir.

BARNARDINE:
How now, Abhorson? what's the news with you?

ABHORSON:
Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your
prayers; for, look you, the warrant's come.

BARNARDINE:
You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not
fitted for 't.

POMPEY:
O, the better, sir; for he that drinks all night,
and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the
sounder all the next day.

ABHORSON:
Look you, sir; here comes your ghostly father: do
we jest now, think you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily
you are to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort
you and pray with you.

BARNARDINE:
Friar, not I I have been drinking hard all night,
and I will have more time to prepare me, or they
shall beat out my brains with billets: I will not
consent to die this day, that's certain.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, sir, you must: and therefore I beseech you
Look forward on the journey you shall go.

BARNARDINE:
I swear I will not die to-day for any man's
persuasion.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
But hear you.

BARNARDINE:
Not a word: if you have any thing to say to me,
come to my ward; for thence will not I to-day.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Unfit to live or die: O gravel heart!
After him, fellows; bring him to the block.

Provost:
Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
A creature unprepared, unmeet for death;
And to transport him in the mind he is
Were damnable.

Provost:
Here in the prison, father,
There died this morning of a cruel fever
One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head
Just of his colour. What if we do omit
This reprobate till he were well inclined;
And satisfy the deputy with the visage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
Prefix'd by Angelo: see this be done,
And sent according to command; whiles I
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.

Provost:
This shall be done, good father, presently.
But Barnardine must die this afternoon:
And how shall we continue Claudio,
To save me from the danger that might come
If he were known alive?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Let this be done.
Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio:
Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
To the under generation, you shall find
Your safety manifested.

Provost:
I am your free dependant.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
Now will I write letters to Angelo,--
The provost, he shall bear them, whose contents
Shall witness to him I am near at home,
And that, by great injunctions, I am bound
To enter publicly: him I'll desire
To meet me at the consecrated fount
A league below the city; and from thence,
By cold gradation and well-balanced form,
We shall proceed with Angelo.

Provost:
Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Convenient is it. Make a swift return;
For I would commune with you of such things
That want no ear but yours.

Provost:
I'll make all speed.

ISABELLA:

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know
If yet her brother's pardon be come hither:
But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
To make her heavenly comforts of despair,
When it is least expected.

ISABELLA:
Ho, by your leave!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.

ISABELLA:
The better, given me by so holy a man.
Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He hath released him, Isabel, from the world:
His head is off and sent to Angelo.

ISABELLA:
Nay, but it is not so.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is no other: show your wisdom, daughter,
In your close patience.

ISABELLA:
O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You shall not be admitted to his sight.

ISABELLA:
Unhappy Claudio! wretched Isabel!
Injurious world! most damned Angelo!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
Forbear it therefore; give your cause to heaven.
Mark what I say, which you shall find
By every syllable a faithful verity:
The duke comes home to-morrow; nay, dry your eyes;
One of our convent, and his confessor,
Gives me this instance: already he hath carried
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
There to give up their power. If you can, pace your wisdom
In that good path that I would wish it go,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
Grace of the duke, revenges to your heart,
And general honour.

ISABELLA:
I am directed by you.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
'Tis that he sent me of the duke's return:
Say, by this token, I desire his company
At Mariana's house to-night. Her cause and yours
I'll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you
Before the duke, and to the head of Angelo
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
I am combined by a sacred vow
And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter:
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
With a light heart; trust not my holy order,
If I pervert your course. Who's here?

LUCIO:
Good even. Friar, where's the provost?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not within, sir.

LUCIO:
O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see
thine eyes so red: thou must be patient. I am fain
to dine and sup with water and bran; I dare not for
my head fill my belly; one fruitful meal would set
me to 't. But they say the duke will be here
to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I loved thy brother:
if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been
at home, he had lived.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your
reports; but the best is, he lives not in them.

LUCIO:
Friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as I do:
he's a better woodman than thou takest him for.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Well, you'll answer this one day. Fare ye well.

LUCIO:
Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee
I can tell thee pretty tales of the duke.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You have told me too many of him already, sir, if
they be true; if not true, none were enough.

LUCIO:
I was once before him for getting a wench with child.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Did you such a thing?

LUCIO:
Yes, marry, did I but I was fain to forswear it;
they would else have married me to the rotten medlar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.

LUCIO:
By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end:
if bawdy talk offend you, we'll have very little of
it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr; I shall stick.

ESCALUS:
Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.

ANGELO:
In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions
show much like to madness: pray heaven his wisdom be
not tainted! And why meet him at the gates, and
redeliver our authorities there

ESCALUS:
I guess not.

ANGELO:
And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his
entering, that if any crave redress of injustice,
they should exhibit their petitions in the street?

ESCALUS:
He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of
complaints, and to deliver us from devices
hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand
against us.

ANGELO:
Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaimed betimes
i' the morn; I'll call you at your house: give
notice to such men of sort and suit as are to meet
him.

ESCALUS:
I shall, sir. Fare you well.

ANGELO:
Good night.
This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflower'd maid!
And by an eminent body that enforced
The law against it! But that her tender shame
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no;
For my authority bears of a credent bulk,
That no particular scandal once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,
Save that riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
By so receiving a dishonour'd life
With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived!
A lack, when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right: we would, and we would not.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
These letters at fit time deliver me
The provost knows our purpose and our plot.
The matter being afoot, keep your instruction,
And hold you ever to our special drift;
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that,
As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius' house,
And tell him where I stay: give the like notice
To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
But send me Flavius first.

FRIAR PETER:
It shall be speeded well.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste:
Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends
Will greet us here anon, my gentle Varrius.

ISABELLA:
To speak so indirectly I am loath:
I would say the truth; but to accuse him so,
That is your part: yet I am advised to do it;
He says, to veil full purpose.

MARIANA:
Be ruled by him.

ISABELLA:
Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
He speak against me on the adverse side,
I should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic
That's bitter to sweet end.

MARIANA:
I would Friar Peter--

ISABELLA:
O, peace! the friar is come.

FRIAR PETER:
Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
Where you may have such vantage on the duke,
He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded;
The generous and gravest citizens
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
The duke is entering: therefore, hence, away!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
My very worthy cousin, fairly met!
Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.

ANGELO:
Happy return be to your royal grace!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Many and hearty thankings to you both.
We have made inquiry of you; and we hear
Such goodness of your justice, that our soul
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
Forerunning more requital.

ANGELO:
You make my bonds still greater.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, your desert speaks loud; and I should wrong it,
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
When it deserves, with characters of brass,
A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand,
And let the subject see, to make them know
That outward courtesies would fain proclaim
Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus,
You must walk by us on our other hand;
And good supporters are you.

FRIAR PETER:
Now is your time: speak loud and kneel before him.

ISABELLA:
Justice, O royal duke! Vail your regard
Upon a wrong'd, I would fain have said, a maid!
O worthy prince, dishonour not your eye
By throwing it on any other object
Till you have heard me in my true complaint
And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Relate your wrongs; in what? by whom? be brief.
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice:
Reveal yourself to him.

ISABELLA:
O worthy duke,
You bid me seek redemption of the devil:
Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak
Must either punish me, not being believed,
Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here!

ANGELO:
My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm:
She hath been a suitor to me for her brother
Cut off by course of justice,--

ISABELLA:
By course of justice!

ANGELO:
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.

ISABELLA:
Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak:
That Angelo's forsworn; is it not strange?
That Angelo's a murderer; is 't not strange?
That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin-violator;
Is it not strange and strange?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Nay, it is ten times strange.

ISABELLA:
It is not truer he is Angelo
Than this is all as true as it is strange:
Nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth
To the end of reckoning.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Away with her! Poor soul,
She speaks this in the infirmity of sense.

ISABELLA:
O prince, I conjure thee, as thou believest
There is another comfort than this world,
That thou neglect me not, with that opinion
That I am touch'd with madness! Make not impossible
That which but seems unlike: 'tis not impossible
But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute
As Angelo; even so may Angelo,
In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
Be an arch-villain; believe it, royal prince:
If he be less, he's nothing; but he's more,
Had I more name for badness.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
By mine honesty,
If she be mad,--as I believe no other,--
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
Such a dependency of thing on thing,
As e'er I heard in madness.

ISABELLA:
O gracious duke,
Harp not on that, nor do not banish reason
For inequality; but let your reason serve
To make the truth appear where it seems hid,
And hide the false seems true.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Many that are not mad
Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?

ISABELLA:
I am the sister of one Claudio,
Condemn'd upon the act of fornication
To lose his head; condemn'd by Angelo:
I, in probation of a sisterhood,
Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
As then the messenger,--

LUCIO:
That's I, an't like your grace:
I came to her from Claudio, and desired her
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
For her poor brother's pardon.

ISABELLA:
That's he indeed.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You were not bid to speak.

LUCIO:
No, my good lord;
Nor wish'd to hold my peace.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I wish you now, then;
Pray you, take note of it: and when you have
A business for yourself, pray heaven you then
Be perfect.

LUCIO:
I warrant your honour.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The warrants for yourself; take heed to't.

ISABELLA:
This gentleman told somewhat of my tale,--

LUCIO:
Right.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It may be right; but you are i' the wrong
To speak before your time. Proceed.

ISABELLA:
I went
To this pernicious caitiff deputy,--

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That's somewhat madly spoken.

ISABELLA:
Pardon it;
The phrase is to the matter.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Mended again. The matter; proceed.

ISABELLA:
In brief, to set the needless process by,
How I persuaded, how I pray'd, and kneel'd,
How he refell'd me, and how I replied,--
For this was of much length,--the vile conclusion
I now begin with grief and shame to utter:
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
To his concupiscible intemperate lust,
Release my brother; and, after much debatement,
My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,
And I did yield to him: but the next morn betimes,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
For my poor brother's head.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This is most likely!

ISABELLA:
O, that it were as like as it is true!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
By heaven, fond wretch, thou knowist not what thou speak'st,
Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour
In hateful practise. First, his integrity
Stands without blemish. Next, it imports no reason
That with such vehemency he should pursue
Faults proper to himself: if he had so offended,
He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself
And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on:
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
Thou camest here to complain.

ISABELLA:
And is this all?
Then, O you blessed ministers above,
Keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
In countenance! Heaven shield your grace from woe,
As I, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I know you'ld fain be gone. An officer!
To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
On him so near us? This needs must be a practise.
Who knew of Your intent and coming hither?

ISABELLA:
One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?

LUCIO:
My lord, I know him; 'tis a meddling friar;
I do not like the man: had he been lay, my lord
For certain words he spake against your grace
In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Words against me? this is a good friar, belike!
And to set on this wretched woman here
Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.

LUCIO:
But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
I saw them at the prison: a saucy friar,
A very scurvy fellow.

FRIAR PETER:
Blessed be your royal grace!
I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
Your royal ear abused. First, hath this woman
Most wrongfully accused your substitute,
Who is as free from touch or soil with her
As she from one ungot.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
We did believe no less.
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?

FRIAR PETER:
I know him for a man divine and holy;
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
As he's reported by this gentleman;
And, on my trust, a man that never yet
Did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.

LUCIO:
My lord, most villanously; believe it.

FRIAR PETER:
Well, he in time may come to clear himself;
But at this instant he is sick my lord,
Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request,
Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither,
To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
Is true and false; and what he with his oath
And all probation will make up full clear,
Whensoever he's convented. First, for this woman.
To justify this worthy nobleman,
So vulgarly and personally accused,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
Till she herself confess it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Good friar, let's hear it.
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo;
In this I'll be impartial; be you judge
Of your own cause. Is this the witness, friar?
First, let her show her face, and after speak.

MARIANA:
Pardon, my lord; I will not show my face
Until my husband bid me.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What, are you married?

MARIANA:
No, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Are you a maid?

MARIANA:
No, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
A widow, then?

MARIANA:
Neither, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Why, you are nothing then: neither maid, widow, nor wife?

LUCIO:
My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are
neither maid, widow, nor wife.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Silence that fellow: I would he had some cause
To prattle for himself.

LUCIO:
Well, my lord.

MARIANA:
My lord; I do confess I ne'er was married;
And I confess besides I am no maid:
I have known my husband; yet my husband
Knows not that ever he knew me.

LUCIO:
He was drunk then, my lord: it can be no better.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!

LUCIO:
Well, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.

MARIANA:
Now I come to't my lord
She that accuses him of fornication,
In self-same manner doth accuse my husband,
And charges him my lord, with such a time
When I'll depose I had him in mine arms
With all the effect of love.

ANGELO:
Charges she more than me?

MARIANA:
Not that I know.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No? you say your husband.

MARIANA:
Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.

ANGELO:
This is a strange abuse. Let's see thy face.

MARIANA:
My husband bids me; now I will unmask.
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
Which once thou sworest was worth the looking on;
This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
Was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
That took away the match from Isabel,
And did supply thee at thy garden-house
In her imagined person.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Know you this woman?

LUCIO:
Carnally, she says.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sirrah, no more!

LUCIO:
Enough, my lord.

ANGELO:
My lord, I must confess I know this woman:
And five years since there was some speech of marriage
Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
Partly for that her promised proportions
Came short of composition, but in chief
For that her reputation was disvalued
In levity: since which time of five years
I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
Upon my faith and honour.

MARIANA:
Noble prince,
As there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
I am affianced this man's wife as strongly
As words could make up vows: and, my good lord,
But Tuesday night last gone in's garden-house
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees
Or else for ever be confixed here,
A marble monument!

ANGELO:
I did but smile till now:
Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice
My patience here is touch'd. I do perceive
These poor informal women are no more
But instruments of some more mightier member
That sets them on: let me have way, my lord,
To find this practise out.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Ay, with my heart
And punish them to your height of pleasure.
Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
Compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
Though they would swear down each particular saint,
Were testimonies against his worth and credit
That's seal'd in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,
Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
To find out this abuse, whence 'tis derived.
There is another friar that set them on;
Let him be sent for.

FRIAR PETER:
Would he were here, my lord! for he indeed
Hath set the women on to this complaint:
Your provost knows the place where he abides
And he may fetch him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Go do it instantly.
And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Do with your injuries as seems you best,
In any chastisement: I for a while will leave you;
But stir not you till you have well determined
Upon these slanderers.

ESCALUS:
My lord, we'll do it throughly.
Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that
Friar Lodowick to be a dishonest person?

LUCIO:
'Cucullus non facit monachum:' honest in nothing
but in his clothes; and one that hath spoke most
villanous speeches of the duke.

ESCALUS:
We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
enforce them against him: we shall find this friar a
notable fellow.

LUCIO:
As any in Vienna, on my word.

ESCALUS:
Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with her.
Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question; you
shall see how I'll handle her.

LUCIO:
Not better than he, by her own report.

ESCALUS:
Say you?

LUCIO:
Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately,
she would sooner confess: perchance, publicly,
she'll be ashamed.

ESCALUS:
I will go darkly to work with her.

LUCIO:
That's the way; for women are light at midnight.

ESCALUS:
Come on, mistress: here's a gentlewoman denies all
that you have said.

LUCIO:
My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of; here with
the provost.

ESCALUS:
In very good time: speak not you to him till we
call upon you.

LUCIO:
Mum.

ESCALUS:
Come, sir: did you set these women on to slander
Lord Angelo? they have confessed you did.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis false.

ESCALUS:
How! know you where you are?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Respect to your great place! and let the devil
Be sometime honour'd for his burning throne!
Where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.

ESCALUS:
The duke's in us; and we will hear you speak:
Look you speak justly.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Boldly, at least. But, O, poor souls,
Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox?
Good night to your redress! Is the duke gone?
Then is your cause gone too. The duke's unjust,
Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
And put your trial in the villain's mouth
Which here you come to accuse.

LUCIO:
This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.

ESCALUS:
Why, thou unreverend and unhallow'd friar,
Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth
And in the witness of his proper ear,
To call him villain? and then to glance from him
To the duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
Take him hence; to the rack with him! We'll touse you
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
What 'unjust'!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Be not so hot; the duke
Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
Dare rack his own: his subject am I not,
Nor here provincial. My business in this state
Made me a looker on here in Vienna,
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble
Till it o'er-run the stew; laws for all faults,
But faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes
Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
As much in mock as mark.

ESCALUS:
Slander to the state! Away with him to prison!

ANGELO:
What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?
Is this the man that you did tell us of?

LUCIO:
'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, goodman baldpate:
do you know me?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice: I
met you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.

LUCIO:
O, did you so? And do you remember what you said of the duke?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Most notedly, sir.

LUCIO:
Do you so, sir? And was the duke a fleshmonger, a
fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You must, sir, change persons with me, ere you make
that my report: you, indeed, spoke so of him; and
much more, much worse.

LUCIO:
O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the
nose for thy speeches?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I protest I love the duke as I love myself.

ANGELO:
Hark, how the villain would close now, after his
treasonable abuses!

ESCALUS:
Such a fellow is not to be talked withal. Away with
him to prison! Where is the provost? Away with him
to prison! lay bolts enough upon him: let him
speak no more. Away with those giglots too, and
with the other confederate companion!

DUKE VINCENTIO:

ANGELO:
What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.

LUCIO:
Come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! Why, you
bald-pated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, must
you? Show your knave's visage, with a pox to you!
show your sheep-biting face, and be hanged an hour!
Will't not off?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Thou art the first knave that e'er madest a duke.
First, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
Sneak not away, sir; for the friar and you
Must have a word anon. Lay hold on him.

LUCIO:
This may prove worse than hanging.

DUKE VINCENTIO:

ANGELO:
O my dread lord,
I should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
To think I can be undiscernible,
When I perceive your grace, like power divine,
Hath look'd upon my passes. Then, good prince,
No longer session hold upon my shame,
But let my trial be mine own confession:
Immediate sentence then and sequent death
Is all the grace I beg.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Come hither, Mariana.
Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?

ANGELO:
I was, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Go take her hence, and marry her instantly.
Do you the office, friar; which consummate,
Return him here again. Go with him, provost.

ESCALUS:
My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour
Than at the strangeness of it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Come hither, Isabel.
Your friar is now your prince: as I was then
Advertising and holy to your business,
Not changing heart with habit, I am still
Attorney'd at your service.

ISABELLA:
O, give me pardon,
That I, your vassal, have employ'd and pain'd
Your unknown sovereignty!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You are pardon'd, Isabel:
And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart;
And you may marvel why I obscured myself,
Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power
Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
It was the swift celerity of his death,
Which I did think with slower foot came on,
That brain'd my purpose. But, peace be with him!
That life is better life, past fearing death,
Than that which lives to fear: make it your comfort,
So happy is your brother.

ISABELLA:
I do, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
For this new-married man approaching here,
Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
Your well defended honour, you must pardon
For Mariana's sake: but as he adjudged your brother,--
Being criminal, in double violation
Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach
Thereon dependent, for your brother's life,--
The very mercy of the law cries out
Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
'An Angelo for Claudio, death for death!'
Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
Like doth quit like, and MEASURE still FOR MEASURE.
Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested;
Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
We do condemn thee to the very block
Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
Away with him!

MARIANA:
O my most gracious lord,
I hope you will not mock me with a husband.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is your husband mock'd you with a husband.
Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
I thought your marriage fit; else imputation,
For that he knew you, might reproach your life
And choke your good to come; for his possessions,
Although by confiscation they are ours,
We do instate and widow you withal,
To buy you a better husband.

MARIANA:
O my dear lord,
I crave no other, nor no better man.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Never crave him; we are definitive.

MARIANA:
Gentle my liege,--

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You do but lose your labour.
Away with him to death!
Now, sir, to you.

MARIANA:
O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part;
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
I'll lend you all my life to do you service.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Against all sense you do importune her:
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
And take her hence in horror.

MARIANA:
Isabel,
Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
Hold up your hands, say nothing; I'll speak all.
They say, best men are moulded out of faults;
And, for the most, become much more the better
For being a little bad: so may my husband.
O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He dies for Claudio's death.

ISABELLA:
Most bounteous sir,
Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,
As if my brother lived: I partly think
A due sincerity govern'd his deeds,
Till he did look on me: since it is so,
Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
In that he did the thing for which he died:
For Angelo,
His act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
And must be buried but as an intent
That perish'd by the way: thoughts are no subjects;
Intents but merely thoughts.

MARIANA:
Merely, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Your suit's unprofitable; stand up, I say.
I have bethought me of another fault.
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an unusual hour?

Provost:
It was commanded so.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Had you a special warrant for the deed?

Provost:
No, my good lord; it was by private message.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
For which I do discharge you of your office:
Give up your keys.

Provost:
Pardon me, noble lord:
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
Yet did repent me, after more advice;
For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
That should by private order else have died,
I have reserved alive.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What's he?

Provost:
His name is Barnardine.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.
Go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.

ESCALUS:
I am sorry, one so learned and so wise
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd,
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood.
And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.

ANGELO:
I am sorry that such sorrow I procure:
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
That I crave death more willingly than mercy;
'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Which is that Barnardine?

Provost:
This, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
There was a friar told me of this man.
Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul.
That apprehends no further than this world,
And squarest thy life according. Thou'rt condemn'd:
But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all;
And pray thee take this mercy to provide
For better times to come. Friar, advise him;
I leave him to your hand. What muffled fellow's that?

Provost:
This is another prisoner that I saved.
Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;
As like almost to Claudio as himself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:

LUCIO:
'Faith, my lord. I spoke it but according to the
trick. If you will hang me for it, you may; but I
had rather it would please you I might be whipt.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Whipt first, sir, and hanged after.
Proclaim it, provost, round about the city.
Is any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow,
As I have heard him swear himself there's one
Whom he begot with child, let her appear,
And he shall marry her: the nuptial finish'd,
Let him be whipt and hang'd.

LUCIO:
I beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.
Your highness said even now, I made you a duke:
good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison;
And see our pleasure herein executed.

LUCIO:
Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
whipping, and hanging.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Slandering a prince deserves it.
She, Claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo:
I have confess'd her and I know her virtue.
Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness:
There's more behind that is more gratulate.
Thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy:
We shill employ thee in a worthier place.
Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio's:
The offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,
I have a motion much imports your good;
Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
What's mine is yours and what is yours is mine.
So, bring us to our palace; where we'll show
What's yet behind, that's meet you all should know.

SLY:
I'll pheeze you, in faith.

Hostess:
A pair of stocks, you rogue!

SLY:
Ye are a baggage: the Slys are no rogues; look in
the chronicles; we came in with Richard Conqueror.
Therefore paucas pallabris; let the world slide: sessa!

Hostess:
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?

SLY:
No, not a denier. Go by, Jeronimy: go to thy cold
bed, and warm thee.

Hostess:
I know my remedy; I must go fetch the
third--borough.

SLY:
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll answer him
by law: I'll not budge an inch, boy: let him come,
and kindly.

Lord:
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds:
Brach Merriman, the poor cur is emboss'd;
And couple Clowder with the deep--mouth'd brach.
Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault?
I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.

First Huntsman:
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord;
He cried upon it at the merest loss
And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent:
Trust me, I take him for the better dog.

Lord:
Thou art a fool: if Echo were as fleet,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such.
But sup them well and look unto them all:
To-morrow I intend to hunt again.

First Huntsman:
I will, my lord.

Lord:
What's here? one dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?

Second Huntsman:
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warm'd with ale,
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.

Lord:
O monstrous beast! how like a swine he lies!
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were convey'd to bed,
Wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?

First Huntsman:
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.

Second Huntsman:
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.

Lord:
Even as a flattering dream or worthless fancy.
Then take him up and manage well the jest:
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures:
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet:
Procure me music ready when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound;
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight
And with a low submissive reverence
Say 'What is it your honour will command?'
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Full of rose-water and bestrew'd with flowers,
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
And say 'Will't please your lordship cool your hands?'
Some one be ready with a costly suit
And ask him what apparel he will wear;
Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
And that his lady mourns at his disease:
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic;
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
This do and do it kindly, gentle sirs:
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.

First Huntsman:
My lord, I warrant you we will play our part,
As he shall think by our true diligence
He is no less than what we say he is.

Lord:
Take him up gently and to bed with him;
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds:
Belike, some noble gentleman that means,
Travelling some journey, to repose him here.
How now! who is it?

Servant:
An't please your honour, players
That offer service to your lordship.

Lord:
Bid them come near.
Now, fellows, you are welcome.

Players:
We thank your honour.

Lord:
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?

A Player:
So please your lordship to accept our duty.

Lord:
With all my heart. This fellow I remember,
Since once he play'd a farmer's eldest son:
'Twas where you woo'd the gentlewoman so well:
I have forgot your name; but, sure, that part
Was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd.

A Player:
I think 'twas Soto that your honour means.

Lord:
'Tis very true: thou didst it excellent.
Well, you are come to me in a happy time;
The rather for I have some sport in hand
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a lord will hear you play to-night:
But I am doubtful of your modesties;
Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior,--
For yet his honour never heard a play--
You break into some merry passion
And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,
If you should smile he grows impatient.

A Player:
Fear not, my lord: we can contain ourselves,
Were he the veriest antic in the world.

Lord:
Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
And give them friendly welcome every one:
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Sirrah, go you to Barthol'mew my page,
And see him dress'd in all suits like a lady:
That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber;
And call him 'madam,' do him obeisance.
Tell him from me, as he will win my love,
He bear himself with honourable action,
Such as he hath observed in noble ladies
Unto their lords, by them accomplished:
Such duty to the drunkard let him do
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
And say 'What is't your honour will command,
Wherein your lady and your humble wife
May show her duty and make known her love?'
And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom,
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoy'd
To see her noble lord restored to health,
Who for this seven years hath esteem'd him
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar:
And if the boy have not a woman's gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for such a shift,
Which in a napkin being close convey'd
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst:
Anon I'll give thee more instructions.
I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
Voice, gait and action of a gentlewoman:
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
When they do homage to this simple peasant.
I'll in to counsel them; haply my presence
May well abate the over-merry spleen
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.

SLY:
For God's sake, a pot of small ale.

First Servant:
Will't please your lordship drink a cup of sack?

Second Servant:
Will't please your honour taste of these conserves?

Third Servant:
What raiment will your honour wear to-day?

SLY:
I am Christophero Sly; call not me 'honour' nor
'lordship:' I ne'er drank sack in my life; and if
you give me any conserves, give me conserves of
beef: ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear; for I
have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings
than legs, nor no more shoes than feet; nay,
sometimes more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my
toes look through the over-leather.

Lord:
Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour!
O, that a mighty man of such descent,
Of such possessions and so high esteem,
Should be infused with so foul a spirit!

SLY:
What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher
Sly, old Sly's son of Burtonheath, by birth a
pedlar, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a
bear-herd, and now by present profession a tinker?
Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of Wincot, if
she know me not: if she say I am not fourteen pence
on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the
lyingest knave in Christendom. What! I am not
bestraught: here's--

Third Servant:
O, this it is that makes your lady mourn!

Second Servant:
O, this is it that makes your servants droop!

Lord:
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck.
Wilt thou have music? hark! Apollo plays,
And twenty caged nightingales do sing:
Or wilt thou sleep? we'll have thee to a couch
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
On purpose trimm'd up for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walk; we will bestrew the ground:
Or wilt thou ride? thy horses shall be trapp'd,
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
Dost thou love hawking? thou hast hawks will soar
Above the morning lark or wilt thou hunt?
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.

First Servant:
Say thou wilt course; thy greyhounds are as swift
As breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.

Second Servant:
Dost thou love pictures? we will fetch thee straight
Adonis painted by a running brook,
And Cytherea all in sedges hid,
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.

Lord:
We'll show thee Io as she was a maid,
And how she was beguiled and surprised,
As lively painted as the deed was done.

Third Servant:
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.

Lord:
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord:
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
Than any woman in this waning age.

First Servant:
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee
Like envious floods o'er-run her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world;
And yet she is inferior to none.

SLY:
Am I a lord? and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream? or have I dream'd till now?
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
I smell sweet savours and I feel soft things:
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed
And not a tinker nor Christophero Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.

Second Servant:
Will't please your mightiness to wash your hands?
O, how we joy to see your wit restored!
O, that once more you knew but what you are!
These fifteen years you have been in a dream;
Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.

SLY:
These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap.
But did I never speak of all that time?

First Servant:
O, yes, my lord, but very idle words:
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door;
And rail upon the hostess of the house;
And say you would present her at the leet,
Because she brought stone jugs and no seal'd quarts:
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.

SLY:
Ay, the woman's maid of the house.

Third Servant:
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,
Nor no such men as you have reckon'd up,
As Stephen Sly and did John Naps of Greece
And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell
And twenty more such names and men as these
Which never were nor no man ever saw.

SLY:
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!

ALL:
Amen.

SLY:
I thank thee: thou shalt not lose by it.

Page:
How fares my noble lord?

SLY:
Marry, I fare well for here is cheer enough.
Where is my wife?

Page:
Here, noble lord: what is thy will with her?

SLY:
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?
My men should call me 'lord:' I am your goodman.

Page:
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband;
I am your wife in all obedience.

SLY:
I know it well. What must I call her?

Lord:
Madam.

SLY:
Al'ce madam, or Joan madam?

Lord:
'Madam,' and nothing else: so lords
call ladies.

SLY:
Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd
And slept above some fifteen year or more.

Page:
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandon'd from your bed.

SLY:
'Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
Madam, undress you and come now to bed.

Page:
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two,
Or, if not so, until the sun be set:
For your physicians have expressly charged,
In peril to incur your former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed:
I hope this reason stands for my excuse.

SLY:
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly
tarry so long. But I would be loath to fall into
my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in
despite of the flesh and the blood.

Messenger:
Your honour's players, heating your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy;
For so your doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood,
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy:
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.

SLY:
Marry, I will, let them play it. Is not a
comondy a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?

Page:
No, my good lord; it is more pleasing stuff.

SLY:
What, household stuff?

Page:
It is a kind of history.

SLY:
Well, well see't. Come, madam wife, sit by my side
and let the world slip: we shall ne'er be younger.

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy,
The pleasant garden of great Italy;
And by my father's love and leave am arm'd
With his good will and thy good company,
My trusty servant, well approved in all,
Here let us breathe and haply institute
A course of learning and ingenious studies.
Pisa renown'd for grave citizens
Gave me my being and my father first,
A merchant of great traffic through the world,
Vincetino come of Bentivolii.
Vincetino's son brought up in Florence
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived,
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds:
And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
Virtue and that part of philosophy
Will I apply that treats of happiness
By virtue specially to be achieved.
Tell me thy mind; for I have Pisa left
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep
And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.

TRANIO:
Mi perdonato, gentle master mine,
I am in all affected as yourself;
Glad that you thus continue your resolve
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Only, good master, while we do admire
This virtue and this moral discipline,
Let's be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray;
Or so devote to Aristotle's cheques
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured:
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have
And practise rhetoric in your common talk;
Music and poesy use to quicken you;
The mathematics and the metaphysics,
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you;
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en:
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.

LUCENTIO:
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
We could at once put us in readiness,
And take a lodging fit to entertain
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
But stay a while: what company is this?

TRANIO:
Master, some show to welcome us to town.

BAPTISTA:
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am resolved you know;
That is, not bestow my youngest daughter
Before I have a husband for the elder:
If either of you both love Katharina,
Because I know you well and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.

GREMIO:

KATHARINA:
I pray you, sir, is it your will
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?

HORTENSIO:
Mates, maid! how mean you that? no mates for you,
Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.

KATHARINA:
I'faith, sir, you shall never need to fear:
I wis it is not half way to her heart;
But if it were, doubt not her care should be
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool
And paint your face and use you like a fool.

HORTENSIA:
From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!

GREMIO:
And me too, good Lord!

TRANIO:
Hush, master! here's some good pastime toward:
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.

LUCENTIO:
But in the other's silence do I see
Maid's mild behavior and sobriety.
Peace, Tranio!

TRANIO:
Well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.

BAPTISTA:
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said, Bianca, get you in:
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.

KATHARINA:
A pretty peat! it is best
Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.

BIANCA:
Sister, content you in my discontent.
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe:
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to took and practise by myself.

LUCENTIO:
Hark, Tranio! thou may'st hear Minerva speak.

HORTENSIO:
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
Sorry am I that our good will effects
Bianca's grief.

GREMIO:
Why will you mew her up,
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue?

BAPTISTA:
Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolved:
Go in, Bianca:
And for I know she taketh most delight
In music, instruments and poetry,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house,
Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,
Or Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
I will be very kind, and liberal
To mine own children in good bringing up:
And so farewell. Katharina, you may stay;
For I have more to commune with Bianca.

KATHARINA:
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What,
shall I be appointed hours; as though, belike, I
knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?

GREMIO:
You may go to the devil's dam: your gifts are so
good, here's none will hold you. Their love is not
so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails
together, and fast it fairly out: our cakes dough on
both sides. Farewell: yet for the love I bear my
sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit
man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will
wish him to her father.

HORTENSIO:
So will I, Signior Gremio: but a word, I pray.
Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked
parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both,
that we may yet again have access to our fair
mistress and be happy rivals in Bianco's love, to
labour and effect one thing specially.

GREMIO:
What's that, I pray?

HORTENSIO:
Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.

GREMIO:
A husband! a devil.

HORTENSIO:
I say, a husband.

GREMIO:
I say, a devil. Thinkest thou, Hortensio, though
her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool
to be married to hell?

HORTENSIO:
Tush, Gremio, though it pass your patience and mine
to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good
fellows in the world, an a man could light on them,
would take her with all faults, and money enough.

GREMIO:
I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her dowry with
this condition, to be whipped at the high cross
every morning.

HORTENSIO:
Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
apples. But come; since this bar in law makes us
friends, it shall be so far forth friendly
maintained all by helping Baptista's eldest daughter
to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband,
and then have to't a fresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man
be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring.
How say you, Signior Gremio?

GREMIO:
I am agreed; and would I had given him the best
horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would
thoroughly woo her, wed her and bed her and rid the
house of her! Come on.

TRANIO:
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold?

LUCENTIO:
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely;
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
I found the effect of love in idleness:
And now in plainness do confess to thee,
That art to me as secret and as dear
As Anna to the queen of Carthage was,
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst;
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.

TRANIO:
Master, it is no time to chide you now;
Affection is not rated from the heart:
If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so,
'Redime te captum quam queas minimo.'

LUCENTIO:
Gramercies, lad, go forward; this contents:
The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.

TRANIO:
Master, you look'd so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.

LUCENTIO:
O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand.
When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand.

TRANIO:
Saw you no more? mark'd you not how her sister
Began to scold and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move
And with her breath she did perfume the air:
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.

TRANIO:
Nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir: if you love the maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd
That till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home;
And therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.

LUCENTIO:
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
But art thou not advised, he took some care
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?

TRANIO:
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now 'tis plotted.

LUCENTIO:
I have it, Tranio.

TRANIO:
Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.

LUCENTIO:
Tell me thine first.

TRANIO:
You will be schoolmaster
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
That's your device.

LUCENTIO:
It is: may it be done?

TRANIO:
Not possible; for who shall bear your part,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son,
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Visit his countrymen and banquet them?

LUCENTIO:
Basta; content thee, for I have it full.
We have not yet been seen in any house,
Nor can we lie distinguish'd by our faces
For man or master; then it follows thus;
Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,
Keep house and port and servants as I should:
I will some other be, some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
'Tis hatch'd and shall be so: Tranio, at once
Uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak:
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee;
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.

TRANIO:
So had you need.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient;
For so your father charged me at our parting,
'Be serviceable to my son,' quoth he,
Although I think 'twas in another sense;
I am content to be Lucentio,
Because so well I love Lucentio.

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves:
And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid
Whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue.
Sirrah, where have you been?

BIONDELLO:
Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or
you stolen his? or both? pray, what's the news?

LUCENTIO:
Sirrah, come hither: 'tis no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
Puts my apparel and my countenance on,
And I for my escape have put on his;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
I kill'd a man and fear I was descried:
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
While I make way from hence to save my life:
You understand me?

BIONDELLO:
I, sir! ne'er a whit.

LUCENTIO:
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth:
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.

BIONDELLO:
The better for him: would I were so too!

TRANIO:
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.
But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, I advise
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies:
When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio;
But in all places else your master Lucentio.

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, let's go: one thing more rests, that
thyself execute, to make one among these wooers: if
thou ask me why, sufficeth, my reasons are both good
and weighty.

First Servant:
My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.

SLY:
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely:
comes there any more of it?

Page:
My lord, 'tis but begun.

SLY:
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady:
would 'twere done!

PETRUCHIO:
Verona, for a while I take my leave,
To see my friends in Padua, but of all
My best beloved and approved friend,
Hortensio; and I trow this is his house.
Here, sirrah Grumio; knock, I say.

GRUMIO:
Knock, sir! whom should I knock? is there man has
rebused your worship?

PETRUCHIO:
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.

GRUMIO:
Knock you here, sir! why, sir, what am I, sir, that
I should knock you here, sir?

PETRUCHIO:
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.

GRUMIO:
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock
you first,
And then I know after who comes by the worst.

PETRUCHIO:
Will it not be?
Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, I'll ring it;
I'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.

GRUMIO:
Help, masters, help! my master is mad.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, knock when I bid you, sirrah villain!

HORTENSIO:
How now! what's the matter? My old friend Grumio!
and my good friend Petruchio! How do you all at Verona?

PETRUCHIO:
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
'Con tutto il cuore, ben trovato,' may I say.

HORTENSIO:
'Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor
mio Petruchio.' Rise, Grumio, rise: we will compound
this quarrel.

GRUMIO:
Nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin.
if this be not a lawful case for me to leave his
service, look you, sir, he bid me knock him and rap
him soundly, sir: well, was it fit for a servant to
use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see,
two and thirty, a pip out? Whom would to God I had
well knock'd at first, Then had not Grumio come by the worst.

PETRUCHIO:
A senseless villain! Good Hortensio,
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate
And could not get him for my heart to do it.

GRUMIO:
Knock at the gate! O heavens! Spake you not these
words plain, 'Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here,
knock me well, and knock me soundly'? And come you
now with, 'knocking at the gate'?

PETRUCHIO:
Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, patience; I am Grumio's pledge:
Why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?

PETRUCHIO:
Such wind as scatters young men through the world,
To seek their fortunes farther than at home
Where small experience grows. But in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
Antonio, my father, is deceased;
And I have thrust myself into this maze,
Haply to wive and thrive as best I may:
Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home,
And so am come abroad to see the world.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife?
Thou'ldst thank me but a little for my counsel:
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich
And very rich: but thou'rt too much my friend,
And I'll not wish thee to her.

PETRUCHIO:
Signior Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we
Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife,
As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,
As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd
As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse,
She moves me not, or not removes, at least,
Affection's edge in me, were she as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas:
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.

GRUMIO:
Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his
mind is: Why give him gold enough and marry him to
a puppet or an aglet-baby; or an old trot with ne'er
a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases
as two and fifty horses: why, nothing comes amiss,
so money comes withal.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in,
I will continue that I broach'd in jest.
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
With wealth enough and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman:
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
Is that she is intolerable curst
And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure
That, were my state far worser than it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of gold.

PETRUCHIO:
Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect:
Tell me her father's name and 'tis enough;
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.

HORTENSIO:
Her father is Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman:
Her name is Katharina Minola,
Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue.

PETRUCHIO:
I know her father, though I know not her;
And he knew my deceased father well.
I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her;
And therefore let me be thus bold with you
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.

GRUMIO:
I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts.
O' my word, an she knew him as well as I do, she
would think scolding would do little good upon him:
she may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so:
why, that's nothing; an he begin once, he'll rail in
his rope-tricks. I'll tell you what sir, an she
stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in
her face and so disfigure her with it that she
shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.
You know him not, sir.

HORTENSIO:
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
For in Baptista's keep my treasure is:
He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Binaca,
And her withholds from me and other more,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love,
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
That ever Katharina will be woo'd;
Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,
That none shall have access unto Bianca
Till Katharina the curst have got a husband.

GRUMIO:
Katharina the curst!
A title for a maid of all titles the worst.

HORTENSIO:
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguised in sober robes
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca;
That so I may, by this device, at least
Have leave and leisure to make love to her
And unsuspected court her by herself.

GRUMIO:
Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks,
how the young folks lay their heads together!
Master, master, look about you: who goes there, ha?

HORTENSIO:
Peace, Grumio! it is the rival of my love.
Petruchio, stand by a while.

GRUMIO:
A proper stripling and an amorous!

GREMIO:
O, very well; I have perused the note.
Hark you, sir: I'll have them very fairly bound:
All books of love, see that at any hand;
And see you read no other lectures to her:
You understand me: over and beside
Signior Baptista's liberality,
I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfumed
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to. What will you read to her?

LUCENTIO:
Whate'er I read to her, I'll plead for you
As for my patron, stand you so assured,
As firmly as yourself were still in place:
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words
Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.

GREMIO:
O this learning, what a thing it is!

GRUMIO:
O this woodcock, what an ass it is!

PETRUCHIO:
Peace, sirrah!

HORTENSIO:
Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.

GREMIO:
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
I promised to inquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca:
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man, for learning and behavior
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.

HORTENSIO:
'Tis well; and I have met a gentleman
Hath promised me to help me to another,
A fine musician to instruct our mistress;
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.

GREMIO:
Beloved of me; and that my deeds shall prove.

GRUMIO:
And that his bags shall prove.

HORTENSIO:
Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love:
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,
I'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo curst Katharina,
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.

GREMIO:
So said, so done, is well.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?

PETRUCHIO:
I know she is an irksome brawling scold:
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.

GREMIO:
No, say'st me so, friend? What countryman?

PETRUCHIO:
Born in Verona, old Antonio's son:
My father dead, my fortune lives for me;
And I do hope good days and long to see.

GREMIO:
O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange!
But if you have a stomach, to't i' God's name:
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this wild-cat?

PETRUCHIO:
Will I live?

GRUMIO:
Will he woo her? ay, or I'll hang her.

PETRUCHIO:
Why came I hither but to that intent?
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea puff'd up with winds
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear
As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire?
Tush, tush! fear boys with bugs.

GRUMIO:
For he fears none.

GREMIO:
Hortensio, hark:
This gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.

HORTENSIO:
I promised we would be contributors
And bear his charging of wooing, whatsoe'er.

GREMIO:
And so we will, provided that he win her.

GRUMIO:
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.

TRANIO:
Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?

BIONDELLO:
He that has the two fair daughters: is't he you mean?

TRANIO:
Even he, Biondello.

GREMIO:
Hark you, sir; you mean not her to--

TRANIO:
Perhaps, him and her, sir: what have you to do?

PETRUCHIO:
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.

TRANIO:
I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let's away.

LUCENTIO:
Well begun, Tranio.

HORTENSIO:
Sir, a word ere you go;
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?

TRANIO:
And if I be, sir, is it any offence?

GREMIO:
No; if without more words you will get you hence.

TRANIO:
Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me as for you?

GREMIO:
But so is not she.

TRANIO:
For what reason, I beseech you?

GREMIO:
For this reason, if you'll know,
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.

HORTENSIO:
That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.

TRANIO:
Softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen,
Do me this right; hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noble gentleman,
To whom my father is not all unknown;
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have and me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
Then well one more may fair Bianca have:
And so she shall; Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.

GREMIO:
What! this gentleman will out-talk us all.

LUCENTIO:
Sir, give him head: I know he'll prove a jade.

PETRUCHIO:
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?

HORTENSIO:
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter?

TRANIO:
No, sir; but hear I do that he hath two,
The one as famous for a scolding tongue
As is the other for beauteous modesty.

PETRUCHIO:
Sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.

GREMIO:
Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules;
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.

PETRUCHIO:
Sir, understand you this of me in sooth:
The youngest daughter whom you hearken for
Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
And will not promise her to any man
Until the elder sister first be wed:
The younger then is free and not before.

TRANIO:
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all and me amongst the rest,
And if you break the ice and do this feat,
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.

HORTENSIO:
Sir, you say well and well you do conceive;
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.

TRANIO:
Sir, I shall not be slack: in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.

GRUMIO:
O excellent motion! Fellows, let's be gone.

HORTENSIO:
The motion's good indeed and be it so,
Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.

BIANCA:
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me;
That I disdain: but for these other gawds,
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.

KATHARINA:
Of all thy suitors, here I charge thee, tell
Whom thou lovest best: see thou dissemble not.

BIANCA:
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I never yet beheld that special face
Which I could fancy more than any other.

KATHARINA:
Minion, thou liest. Is't not Hortensio?

BIANCA:
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
I'll plead for you myself, but you shall have
him.

KATHARINA:
O then, belike, you fancy riches more:
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.

BIANCA:
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while:
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.

KATHARINA:
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.

BAPTISTA:
Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl! she weeps.
Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.
For shame, thou helding of a devilish spirit,
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?

KATHARINA:
Her silence flouts me, and I'll be revenged.

BAPTISTA:
What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.

KATHARINA:
What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband;
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding day
And for your love to her lead apes in hell.
Talk not to me: I will go sit and weep
Till I can find occasion of revenge.

BAPTISTA:
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here?

GREMIO:
Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.

BAPTISTA:
Good morrow, neighbour Gremio.
God save you, gentlemen!

PETRUCHIO:
And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter
Call'd Katharina, fair and virtuous?

BAPTISTA:
I have a daughter, sir, called Katharina.

GREMIO:
You are too blunt: go to it orderly.

PETRUCHIO:
You wrong me, Signior Gremio: give me leave.
I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
That, hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report which I so oft have heard.
And, for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine,
Cunning in music and the mathematics,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant:
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong:
His name is Licio, born in Mantua.

BAPTISTA:
You're welcome, sir; and he, for your good sake.
But for my daughter Katharina, this I know,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.

PETRUCHIO:
I see you do not mean to part with her,
Or else you like not of my company.

BAPTISTA:
Mistake me not; I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? what may I call your name?

PETRUCHIO:
Petruchio is my name; Antonio's son,
A man well known throughout all Italy.

BAPTISTA:
I know him well: you are welcome for his sake.

GREMIO:
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
Let us, that are poor petitioners, speak too:
Baccare! you are marvellous forward.

PETRUCHIO:
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio; I would fain be doing.

GREMIO:
I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your
wooing. Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am
sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself,
that have been more kindly beholding to you than
any, freely give unto you this young scholar,
that hath been long studying at Rheims; as cunning
in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the other
in music and mathematics: his name is Cambio; pray,
accept his service.

BAPTISTA:
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio.
Welcome, good Cambio.
But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger:
may I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?

TRANIO:
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
That, being a stranger in this city here,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo
And free access and favour as the rest:
And, toward the education of your daughters,
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:
If you accept them, then their worth is great.

BAPTISTA:
Lucentio is your name; of whence, I pray?

TRANIO:
Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio.

BAPTISTA:
A mighty man of Pisa; by report
I know him well: you are very welcome, sir,
Take you the lute, and you the set of books;
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within!
Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
To my daughters; and tell them both,
These are their tutors: bid them use them well.
We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.

PETRUCHIO:
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
Which I have better'd rather than decreased:
Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?

BAPTISTA:
After my death the one half of my lands,
And in possession twenty thousand crowns.

PETRUCHIO:
And, for that dowry, I'll assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
In all my lands and leases whatsoever:
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.

BAPTISTA:
Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
That is, her love; for that is all in all.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, that is nothing: for I tell you, father,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
And where two raging fires meet together
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury:
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all:
So I to her and so she yields to me;
For I am rough and woo not like a babe.

BAPTISTA:
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed!
But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.

PETRUCHIO:
Ay, to the proof; as mountains are for winds,
That shake not, though they blow perpetually.

BAPTISTA:
How now, my friend! why dost thou look so pale?

HORTENSIO:
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.

BAPTISTA:
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?

HORTENSIO:
I think she'll sooner prove a soldier
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.

BAPTISTA:
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?

HORTENSIO:
Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering;
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
'Frets, call you these?' quoth she; 'I'll fume
with them:'
And, with that word, she struck me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way;
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a pillory, looking through the lute;
While she did call me rascal fiddler
And twangling Jack; with twenty such vile terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench;
I love her ten times more than e'er I did:
O, how I long to have some chat with her!

BAPTISTA:
Well, go with me and be not so discomfited:
Proceed in practise with my younger daughter;
She's apt to learn and thankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?

PETRUCHIO:
I pray you do.
I will attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
Say that she rail; why then I'll tell her plain
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale:
Say that she frown, I'll say she looks as clear
As morning roses newly wash'd with dew:
Say she be mute and will not speak a word;
Then I'll commend her volubility,
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence:
If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week:
If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
When I shall ask the banns and when be married.
But here she comes; and now, Petruchio, speak.
Good morrow, Kate; for that's your name, I hear.

KATHARINA:
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
They call me Katharina that do talk of me.

PETRUCHIO:
You lie, in faith; for you are call'd plain Kate,
And bonny Kate and sometimes Kate the curst;
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom
Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation;
Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.

KATHARINA:
Moved! in good time: let him that moved you hither
Remove you hence: I knew you at the first
You were a moveable.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, what's a moveable?

KATHARINA:
A join'd-stool.

PETRUCHIO:
Thou hast hit it: come, sit on me.

KATHARINA:
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.

PETRUCHIO:
Women are made to bear, and so are you.

KATHARINA:
No such jade as you, if me you mean.

PETRUCHIO:
Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee;
For, knowing thee to be but young and light--

KATHARINA:
Too light for such a swain as you to catch;
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.

PETRUCHIO:
Should be! should--buzz!

KATHARINA:
Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.

PETRUCHIO:
O slow-wing'd turtle! shall a buzzard take thee?

KATHARINA:
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, come, you wasp; i' faith, you are too angry.

KATHARINA:
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.

PETRUCHIO:
My remedy is then, to pluck it out.

KATHARINA:
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies,

PETRUCHIO:
Who knows not where a wasp does
wear his sting? In his tail.

KATHARINA:
In his tongue.

PETRUCHIO:
Whose tongue?

KATHARINA:
Yours, if you talk of tails: and so farewell.

PETRUCHIO:
What, with my tongue in your tail? nay, come again,
Good Kate; I am a gentleman.

KATHARINA:
That I'll try.

PETRUCHIO:
I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again.

KATHARINA:
So may you lose your arms:
If you strike me, you are no gentleman;
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.

PETRUCHIO:
A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books!

KATHARINA:
What is your crest? a coxcomb?

PETRUCHIO:
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.

KATHARINA:
No cock of mine; you crow too like a craven.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.

KATHARINA:
It is my fashion, when I see a crab.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, here's no crab; and therefore look not sour.

KATHARINA:
There is, there is.

PETRUCHIO:
Then show it me.

KATHARINA:
Had I a glass, I would.

PETRUCHIO:
What, you mean my face?

KATHARINA:
Well aim'd of such a young one.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.

KATHARINA:
Yet you are wither'd.

PETRUCHIO:
'Tis with cares.

KATHARINA:
I care not.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you scape not so.

KATHARINA:
I chafe you, if I tarry: let me go.

PETRUCHIO:
No, not a whit: I find you passing gentle.
'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar;
For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers:
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk,
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
O slanderous world! Kate like the hazel-twig
Is straight and slender and as brown in hue
As hazel nuts and sweeter than the kernels.
O, let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt.

KATHARINA:
Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.

PETRUCHIO:
Did ever Dian so become a grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate;
And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful!

KATHARINA:
Where did you study all this goodly speech?

PETRUCHIO:
It is extempore, from my mother-wit.

KATHARINA:
A witty mother! witless else her son.

PETRUCHIO:
Am I not wise?

KATHARINA:
Yes; keep you warm.

PETRUCHIO:
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katharina, in thy bed:
And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife; your dowry 'greed on;
And, Will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn;
For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Thy beauty, that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me;
For I am he am born to tame you Kate,
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates.
Here comes your father: never make denial;
I must and will have Katharina to my wife.

BAPTISTA:
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?

PETRUCHIO:
How but well, sir? how but well?
It were impossible I should speed amiss.

BAPTISTA:
Why, how now, daughter Katharina! in your dumps?

KATHARINA:
Call you me daughter? now, I promise you
You have show'd a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half lunatic;
A mad-cup ruffian and a swearing Jack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.

PETRUCHIO:
Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world,
That talk'd of her, have talk'd amiss of her:
If she be curst, it is for policy,
For she's not froward, but modest as the dove;
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity:
And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together,
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.

KATHARINA:
I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first.

GREMIO:
Hark, Petruchio; she says she'll see thee
hang'd first.

TRANIO:
Is this your speeding? nay, then, good night our part!

PETRUCHIO:
Be patient, gentlemen; I choose her for myself:
If she and I be pleased, what's that to you?
'Tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain, being alone,
That she shall still be curst in company.
I tell you, 'tis incredible to believe
How much she loves me: O, the kindest Kate!
She hung about my neck; and kiss on kiss
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twink she won me to her love.
O, you are novices! 'tis a world to see,
How tame, when men and women are alone,
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
Give me thy hand, Kate: I will unto Venice,
To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
I will be sure my Katharina shall be fine.

BAPTISTA:
I know not what to say: but give me your hands;
God send you joy, Petruchio! 'tis a match.

GREMIO:
Amen, say we: we will be witnesses.

PETRUCHIO:
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu;
I will to Venice; Sunday comes apace:
We will have rings and things and fine array;
And kiss me, Kate, we will be married o'Sunday.

GREMIO:
Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?

BAPTISTA:
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part,
And venture madly on a desperate mart.

TRANIO:
'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you:
'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.

BAPTISTA:
The gain I seek is, quiet in the match.

GREMIO:
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptists, to your younger daughter:
Now is the day we long have looked for:
I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.

TRANIO:
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess.

GREMIO:
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.

TRANIO:
Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.

GREMIO:
But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back: 'tis age that nourisheth.

TRANIO:
But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.

BAPTISTA:
Content you, gentlemen: I will compound this strife:
'Tis deeds must win the prize; and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Shall have my Bianca's love.
Say, Signior Gremio, What can you assure her?

GREMIO:
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold;
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl,
Valance of Venice gold in needlework,
Pewter and brass and all things that belong
To house or housekeeping: then, at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
Sixscore fat oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am struck in years, I must confess;
And if I die to-morrow, this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.

TRANIO:
That 'only' came well in. Sir, list to me:
I am my father's heir and only son:
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
I'll leave her houses three or four as good,
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua;
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.
What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio?

GREMIO:
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
My land amounts not to so much in all:
That she shall have; besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marseilles' road.
What, have I choked you with an argosy?

TRANIO:
Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
Than three great argosies; besides two galliases,
And twelve tight galleys: these I will assure her,
And twice as much, whate'er thou offer'st next.

GREMIO:
Nay, I have offer'd all, I have no more;
And she can have no more than all I have:
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.

TRANIO:
Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,
By your firm promise: Gremio is out-vied.

BAPTISTA:
I must confess your offer is the best;
And, let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own; else, you must pardon me,
if you should die before him, where's her dower?

TRANIO:
That's but a cavil: he is old, I young.

GREMIO:
And may not young men die, as well as old?

BAPTISTA:
Well, gentlemen,
I am thus resolved: on Sunday next you know
My daughter Katharina is to be married:
Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca
Be bride to you, if you this assurance;
If not, Signior Gremio:
And so, I take my leave, and thank you both.

GREMIO:
Adieu, good neighbour.
Now I fear thee not:
Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy!
An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.

TRANIO:
A vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide!
Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.
'Tis in my head to do my master good:
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
Must get a father, call'd 'supposed Vincentio;'
And that's a wonder: fathers commonly
Do get their children; but in this case of wooing,
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.

LUCENTIO:
Fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir:
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katharina welcomed you withal?

HORTENSIO:
But, wrangling pedant, this is
The patroness of heavenly harmony:
Then give me leave to have prerogative;
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.

LUCENTIO:
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
To know the cause why music was ordain'd!
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
After his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
And while I pause, serve in your harmony.

HORTENSIO:
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.

BIANCA:
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong,
To strive for that which resteth in my choice:
I am no breeching scholar in the schools;
I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down:
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles;
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.

HORTENSIO:
You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?

LUCENTIO:
That will be never: tune your instrument.

BIANCA:
Where left we last?

LUCENTIO:
Here, madam:
'Hic ibat Simois; hic est Sigeia tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.'

BIANCA:
Construe them.

LUCENTIO:
'Hic ibat,' as I told you before, 'Simois,' I am
Lucentio, 'hic est,' son unto Vincentio of Pisa,
'Sigeia tellus,' disguised thus to get your love;
'Hic steterat,' and that Lucentio that comes
a-wooing, 'Priami,' is my man Tranio, 'regia,'
bearing my port, 'celsa senis,' that we might
beguile the old pantaloon.

HORTENSIO:
Madam, my instrument's in tune.

BIANCA:
Let's hear. O fie! the treble jars.

LUCENTIO:
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.

BIANCA:
Now let me see if I can construe it: 'Hic ibat
Simois,' I know you not, 'hic est Sigeia tellus,' I
trust you not; 'Hic steterat Priami,' take heed
he hear us not, 'regia,' presume not, 'celsa senis,'
despair not.

HORTENSIO:
Madam, 'tis now in tune.

LUCENTIO:
All but the base.

HORTENSIO:
The base is right; 'tis the base knave that jars.
How fiery and forward our pedant is!
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love:
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.

BIANCA:
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.

LUCENTIO:
Mistrust it not: for, sure, AEacides
Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.

BIANCA:
I must believe my master; else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt:
But let it rest. Now, Licio, to you:
Good masters, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.

HORTENSIO:
You may go walk, and give me leave a while:
My lessons make no music in three parts.

LUCENTIO:
Are you so formal, sir? well, I must wait,
And watch withal; for, but I be deceived,
Our fine musician groweth amorous.

HORTENSIO:
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of art;
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy and effectual,
Than hath been taught by any of my trade:
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.

BIANCA:
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.

HORTENSIO:
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.

BIANCA:

Servant:
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books
And help to dress your sister's chamber up:
You know to-morrow is the wedding-day.

BIANCA:
Farewell, sweet masters both; I must be gone.

LUCENTIO:
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.

HORTENSIO:
But I have cause to pry into this pedant:
Methinks he looks as though he were in love:
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale,
Seize thee that list: if once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.

BAPTISTA:

KATHARINA:
No shame but mine: I must, forsooth, be forced
To give my hand opposed against my heart
Unto a mad-brain rudesby full of spleen;
Who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure.
I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior:
And, to be noted for a merry man,
He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
Make feasts, invite friends, and proclaim the banns;
Yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd.
Now must the world point at poor Katharina,
And say, 'Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
If it would please him come and marry her!'

TRANIO:
Patience, good Katharina, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word:
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.

KATHARINA:
Would Katharina had never seen him though!

BAPTISTA:
Go, girl; I cannot blame thee now to weep;
For such an injury would vex a very saint,
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

BIONDELLO:
Master, master! news, old news, and such news as
you never heard of!

BAPTISTA:
Is it new and old too? how may that be?

BIONDELLO:
Why, is it not news, to hear of Petruchio's coming?

BAPTISTA:
Is he come?

BIONDELLO:
Why, no, sir.

BAPTISTA:
What then?

BIONDELLO:
He is coming.

BAPTISTA:
When will he be here?

BIONDELLO:
When he stands where I am and sees you there.

TRANIO:
But say, what to thine old news?

BIONDELLO:
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old
jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair
of boots that have been candle-cases, one buckled,
another laced, an old rusty sword ta'en out of the
town-armory, with a broken hilt, and chapeless;
with two broken points: his horse hipped with an
old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred;
besides, possessed with the glanders and like to mose
in the chine; troubled with the lampass, infected
with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with
spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives,
stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the
bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten;
near-legged before and with, a half-chequed bit
and a head-stall of sheeps leather which, being
restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been
often burst and now repaired with knots; one girth
six time pieced and a woman's crupper of velure,
which hath two letters for her name fairly set down
in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.

BAPTISTA:
Who comes with him?

BIONDELLO:
O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned
like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a
kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red
and blue list; an old hat and 'the humour of forty
fancies' pricked in't for a feather: a monster, a
very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian
footboy or a gentleman's lackey.

TRANIO:
'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-apparell'd.

BAPTISTA:
I am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.

BIONDELLO:
Why, sir, he comes not.

BAPTISTA:
Didst thou not say he comes?

BIONDELLO:
Who? that Petruchio came?

BAPTISTA:
Ay, that Petruchio came.

BIONDELLO:
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.

BAPTISTA:
Why, that's all one.

BIONDELLO:
Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny,
A horse and a man
Is more than one,
And yet not many.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, where be these gallants? who's at home?

BAPTISTA:
You are welcome, sir.

PETRUCHIO:
And yet I come not well.

BAPTISTA:
And yet you halt not.

TRANIO:
Not so well apparell'd
As I wish you were.

PETRUCHIO:
Were it better, I should rush in thus.
But where is Kate? where is my lovely bride?
How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown:
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some comet or unusual prodigy?

BAPTISTA:
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day:
First were we sad, fearing you would not come;
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival!

TRANIO:
And tells us, what occasion of import
Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike yourself?

PETRUCHIO:
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear:
Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,
Though in some part enforced to digress;
Which, at more leisure, I will so excuse
As you shall well be satisfied withal.
But where is Kate? I stay too long from her:
The morning wears, 'tis time we were at church.

TRANIO:
See not your bride in these unreverent robes:
Go to my chamber; Put on clothes of mine.

PETRUCHIO:
Not I, believe me: thus I'll visit her.

BAPTISTA:
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.

PETRUCHIO:
Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words:
To me she's married, not unto my clothes:
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
'Twere well for Kate and better for myself.
But what a fool am I to chat with you,
When I should bid good morrow to my bride,
And seal the title with a lovely kiss!

TRANIO:
He hath some meaning in his mad attire:
We will persuade him, be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to church.

BAPTISTA:
I'll after him, and see the event of this.

TRANIO:
But to her love concerneth us to add
Her father's liking: which to bring to pass,
As I before unparted to your worship,
I am to get a man,--whate'er he be,
It skills not much. we'll fit him to our turn,--
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa;
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.

LUCENTIO:
Were it not that my fellow-school-master
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly,
'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage;
Which once perform'd, let all the world say no,
I'll keep mine own, despite of all the world.

TRANIO:
That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business:
We'll over-reach the greybeard, Gremio,
The narrow-prying father, Minola,
The quaint musician, amorous Licio;
All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?

GREMIO:
As willingly as e'er I came from school.

TRANIO:
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?

GREMIO:
A bridegroom say you? 'tis a groom indeed,
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.

TRANIO:
Curster than she? why, 'tis impossible.

GREMIO:
Why he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.

TRANIO:
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.

GREMIO:
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him!
I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
Should ask, if Katharina should be his wife,
'Ay, by gogs-wouns,' quoth he; and swore so loud,
That, all-amazed, the priest let fall the book;
And, as he stoop'd again to take it up,
The mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff
That down fell priest and book and book and priest:
'Now take them up,' quoth he, 'if any list.'

TRANIO:
What said the wench when he rose again?

GREMIO:
Trembled and shook; for why, he stamp'd and swore,
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done,
He calls for wine: 'A health!' quoth he, as if
He had been aboard, carousing to his mates
After a storm; quaff'd off the muscadel
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face;
Having no other reason
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly
And seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck
And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
That at the parting all the church did echo:
And I seeing this came thence for very shame;
And after me, I know, the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before:
Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.

PETRUCHIO:
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains:
I know you think to dine with me to-day,
And have prepared great store of wedding cheer;
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.

BAPTISTA:
Is't possible you will away to-night?

PETRUCHIO:
I must away to-day, before night come:
Make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go than stay.
And, honest company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away myself
To this most patient, sweet and virtuous wife:
Dine with my father, drink a health to me;
For I must hence; and farewell to you all.

TRANIO:
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.

PETRUCHIO:
It may not be.

GREMIO:
Let me entreat you.

PETRUCHIO:
It cannot be.

KATHARINA:
Let me entreat you.

PETRUCHIO:
I am content.

KATHARINA:
Are you content to stay?

PETRUCHIO:
I am content you shall entreat me stay;
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.

KATHARINA:
Now, if you love me, stay.

PETRUCHIO:
Grumio, my horse.

GRUMIO:
Ay, sir, they be ready: the oats have eaten the horses.

KATHARINA:
Nay, then,
Do what thou canst, I will not go to-day;
No, nor to-morrow, not till I please myself.
The door is open, sir; there lies your way;
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green;
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself:
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom,
That take it on you at the first so roundly.

PETRUCHIO:
O Kate, content thee; prithee, be not angry.

KATHARINA:
I will be angry: what hast thou to do?
Father, be quiet; he shall stay my leisure.

GREMIO:
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.

KATARINA:
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner:
I see a woman may be made a fool,
If she had not a spirit to resist.

PETRUCHIO:
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
Obey the bride, you that attend on her;
Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves:
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
I will be master of what is mine own:
She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,
My household stuff, my field, my barn,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing;
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare;
I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
That stops my way in Padua. Grumio,
Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves;
Rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch
thee, Kate:
I'll buckler thee against a million.

BAPTISTA:
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.

GREMIO:
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.

TRANIO:
Of all mad matches never was the like.

LUCENTIO:
Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?

BIANCA:
That, being mad herself, she's madly mated.

GREMIO:
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.

BAPTISTA:
Neighbours and friends, though bride and
bridegroom wants
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place:
And let Bianca take her sister's room.

TRANIO:
Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?

BAPTISTA:
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let's go.

GRUMIO:
Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and
all foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? was ever
man so rayed? was ever man so weary? I am sent
before to make a fire, and they are coming after to
warm them. Now, were not I a little pot and soon
hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my
tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my
belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me: but
I, with blowing the fire, shall warm myself; for,
considering the weather, a taller man than I will
take cold. Holla, ho! Curtis.

CURTIS:
Who is that calls so coldly?

GRUMIO:
A piece of ice: if thou doubt it, thou mayst slide
from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run
but my head and my neck. A fire good Curtis.

CURTIS:
Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?

GRUMIO:
O, ay, Curtis, ay: and therefore fire, fire; cast
on no water.

CURTIS:
Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported?

GRUMIO:
She was, good Curtis, before this frost: but, thou
knowest, winter tames man, woman and beast; for it
hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and
myself, fellow Curtis.

CURTIS:
Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.

GRUMIO:
Am I but three inches? why, thy horn is a foot; and
so long am I at the least. But wilt thou make a
fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress,
whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon
feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office?

CURTIS:
I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?

GRUMIO:
A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine; and
therefore fire: do thy duty, and have thy duty; for
my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.

CURTIS:
There's fire ready; and therefore, good Grumio, the news.

GRUMIO:
Why, 'Jack, boy! ho! boy!' and as much news as
will thaw.

CURTIS:
Come, you are so full of cony-catching!

GRUMIO:
Why, therefore fire; for I have caught extreme cold.
Where's the cook? is supper ready, the house
trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept; the
serving-men in their new fustian, their white
stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment on?
Be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without,
the carpets laid, and every thing in order?

CURTIS:
All ready; and therefore, I pray thee, news.

GRUMIO:
First, know, my horse is tired; my master and
mistress fallen out.

CURTIS:
How?

GRUMIO:
Out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby
hangs a tale.

CURTIS:
Let's ha't, good Grumio.

GRUMIO:
Lend thine ear.

CURTIS:
Here.

GRUMIO:
There.

CURTIS:
This is to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.

GRUMIO:
And therefore 'tis called a sensible tale: and this
cuff was but to knock at your ear, and beseech
listening. Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a
foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress,--

CURTIS:
Both of one horse?

GRUMIO:
What's that to thee?

CURTIS:
Why, a horse.

GRUMIO:
Tell thou the tale: but hadst thou not crossed me,
thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she
under her horse; thou shouldst have heard in how
miry a place, how she was bemoiled, how he left her
with the horse upon her, how he beat me because
her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt
to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed,
that never prayed before, how I cried, how the
horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I
lost my crupper, with many things of worthy memory,
which now shall die in oblivion and thou return
unexperienced to thy grave.

CURTIS:
By this reckoning he is more shrew than she.

GRUMIO:
Ay; and that thou and the proudest of you all shall
find when he comes home. But what talk I of this?
Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip,
Walter, Sugarsop and the rest: let their heads be
sleekly combed their blue coats brushed and their
garters of an indifferent knit: let them curtsy
with their left legs and not presume to touch a hair
of my master's horse-tail till they kiss their
hands. Are they all ready?

CURTIS:
They are.

GRUMIO:
Call them forth.

CURTIS:
Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to
countenance my mistress.

GRUMIO:
Why, she hath a face of her own.

CURTIS:
Who knows not that?

GRUMIO:
Thou, it seems, that calls for company to
countenance her.

CURTIS:
I call them forth to credit her.

GRUMIO:
Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.

NATHANIEL:
Welcome home, Grumio!

PHILIP:
How now, Grumio!

JOSEPH:
What, Grumio!

NICHOLAS:
Fellow Grumio!

NATHANIEL:
How now, old lad?

GRUMIO:
Welcome, you;--how now, you;-- what, you;--fellow,
you;--and thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce
companions, is all ready, and all things neat?

NATHANIEL:
All things is ready. How near is our master?

GRUMIO:
E'en at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be
not--Cock's passion, silence! I hear my master.

PETRUCHIO:
Where be these knaves? What, no man at door
To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?

ALL SERVING-MEN:
Here, here, sir; here, sir.

PETRUCHIO:
Here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!
You logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms!
What, no attendance? no regard? no duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?

GRUMIO:
Here, sir; as foolish as I was before.

PETRUCHIO:
You peasant swain! you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?

GRUMIO:
Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
And Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' the heel;
There was no link to colour Peter's hat,
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing:
There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory;
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly;
Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.

PETRUCHIO:
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
Where is the life that late I led--
Where are those--Sit down, Kate, and welcome.--
Sound, sound, sound, sound!
Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.
Off with my boots, you rogues! you villains, when?
It was the friar of orders grey,
As he forth walked on his way:--
Out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry:
Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.
Be merry, Kate. Some water, here; what, ho!
Where's my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence,
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither:
One, Kate, that you must kiss, and be acquainted with.
Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.
You whoreson villain! will you let it fall?

KATHARINA:
Patience, I pray you; 'twas a fault unwilling.

PETRUCHIO:
A whoreson beetle-headed, flap-ear'd knave!
Come, Kate, sit down; I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate; or else shall I?
What's this? mutton?

First Servant:
Ay.

PETRUCHIO:
Who brought it?

PETER:
I.

PETRUCHIO:
'Tis burnt; and so is all the meat.
What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser,
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
Theretake it to you, trenchers, cups, and all;
You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves!
What, do you grumble? I'll be with you straight.

KATHARINA:
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet:
The meat was well, if you were so contented.

PETRUCHIO:
I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away;
And I expressly am forbid to touch it,
For it engenders choler, planteth anger;
And better 'twere that both of us did fast,
Since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
Be patient; to-morrow 't shall be mended,
And, for this night, we'll fast for company:
Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.

NATHANIEL:
Peter, didst ever see the like?

PETER:
He kills her in her own humour.

GRUMIO:
Where is he?

CURTIS:
In her chamber, making a sermon of continency to her;
And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,
And sits as one new-risen from a dream.
Away, away! for he is coming hither.

PETRUCHIO:
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
And 'tis my hope to end successfully.
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty;
And till she stoop she must not be full-gorged,
For then she never looks upon her lure.
Another way I have to man my haggard,
To make her come and know her keeper's call,
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
That bate and beat and will not be obedient.
She eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat;
Last night she slept not, nor to-night she shall not;
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
I'll find about the making of the bed;
And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
This way the coverlet, another way the sheets:
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
That all is done in reverend care of her;
And in conclusion she shall watch all night:
And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl
And with the clamour keep her still awake.
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness;
And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak: 'tis charity to show.

TRANIO:
Is't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.

HORTENSIO:
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.

LUCENTIO:
Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?

BIANCA:
What, master, read you? first resolve me that.

LUCENTIO:
I read that I profess, the Art to Love.

BIANCA:
And may you prove, sir, master of your art!

LUCENTIO:
While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!

HORTENSIO:
Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray,
You that durst swear at your mistress Bianca
Loved none in the world so well as Lucentio.

TRANIO:
O despiteful love! unconstant womankind!
I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.

HORTENSIO:
Mistake no more: I am not Licio,
Nor a musician, as I seem to be;
But one that scorn to live in this disguise,
For such a one as leaves a gentleman,
And makes a god of such a cullion:
Know, sir, that I am call'd Hortensio.

TRANIO:
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca;
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.

HORTENSIO:
See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her no more, but do forswear her,
As one unworthy all the former favours
That I have fondly flatter'd her withal.

TRANIO:
And here I take the unfeigned oath,
Never to marry with her though she would entreat:
Fie on her! see, how beastly she doth court him!

HORTENSIO:
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
I will be married to a wealthy widow,
Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me
As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
Shall win my love: and so I take my leave,
In resolution as I swore before.

TRANIO:
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.

BIANCA:
Tranio, you jest: but have you both forsworn me?

TRANIO:
Mistress, we have.

LUCENTIO:
Then we are rid of Licio.

TRANIO:
I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
That shall be wood and wedded in a day.

BIANCA:
God give him joy!

TRANIO:
Ay, and he'll tame her.

BIANCA:
He says so, Tranio.

TRANIO:
Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.

BIANCA:
The taming-school! what, is there such a place?

TRANIO:
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master;
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

BIONDELLO:
O master, master, I have watch'd so long
That I am dog-weary: but at last I spied
An ancient angel coming down the hill,
Will serve the turn.

TRANIO:
What is he, Biondello?

BIONDELLO:
Master, a mercatante, or a pedant,
I know not what; but format in apparel,
In gait and countenance surely like a father.

LUCENTIO:
And what of him, Tranio?

TRANIO:
If he be credulous and trust my tale,
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola,
As if he were the right Vincentio
Take in your love, and then let me alone.

Pedant:
God save you, sir!

TRANIO:
And you, sir! you are welcome.
Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?

Pedant:
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two:
But then up farther, and as for as Rome;
And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.

TRANIO:
What countryman, I pray?

Pedant:
Of Mantua.

TRANIO:
Of Mantua, sir? marry, God forbid!
And come to Padua, careless of your life?

Pedant:
My life, sir! how, I pray? for that goes hard.

TRANIO:
'Tis death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
Your ships are stay'd at Venice, and the duke,
For private quarrel 'twixt your duke and him,
Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly:
'Tis, marvel, but that you are but newly come,
You might have heard it else proclaim'd about.

Pedant:
Alas! sir, it is worse for me than so;
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence and must here deliver them.

TRANIO:
Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
This will I do, and this I will advise you:
First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?

Pedant:
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
Pisa renowned for grave citizens.

TRANIO:
Among them know you one Vincentio?

Pedant:
I know him not, but I have heard of him;
A merchant of incomparable wealth.

TRANIO:
He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
In countenance somewhat doth resemble you.

BIONDELLO:

TRANIO:
To save your life in this extremity,
This favour will I do you for his sake;
And think it not the worst of an your fortunes
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged:
Look that you take upon you as you should;
You understand me, sir: so shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the city:
If this be courtesy, sir, accept of it.

Pedant:
O sir, I do; and will repute you ever
The patron of my life and liberty.

TRANIO:
Then go with me to make the matter good.
This, by the way, I let you understand;
my father is here look'd for every day,
To pass assurance of a dower in marriage
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here:
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you:
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.

GRUMIO:
No, no, forsooth; I dare not for my life.

KATHARINA:
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears:
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars, that come unto my father's door,
Upon entreaty have a present aims;
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity:
But I, who never knew how to entreat,
Nor never needed that I should entreat,
Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,
With oath kept waking and with brawling fed:
And that which spites me more than all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love;
As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,
'Twere deadly sickness or else present death.
I prithee go and get me some repast;
I care not what, so it be wholesome food.

GRUMIO:
What say you to a neat's foot?

KATHARINA:
'Tis passing good: I prithee let me have it.

GRUMIO:
I fear it is too choleric a meat.
How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd?

KATHARINA:
I like it well: good Grumio, fetch it me.

GRUMIO:
I cannot tell; I fear 'tis choleric.
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?

KATHARINA:
A dish that I do love to feed upon.

GRUMIO:
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.

KATHARINA:
Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.

GRUMIO:
Nay then, I will not: you shall have the mustard,
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.

KATHARINA:
Then both, or one, or any thing thou wilt.

GRUMIO:
Why then, the mustard without the beef.

KATHARINA:
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
That feed'st me with the very name of meat:
Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you,
That triumph thus upon my misery!
Go, get thee gone, I say.

PETRUCHIO:
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?

HORTENSIO:
Mistress, what cheer?

KATHARINA:
Faith, as cold as can be.

PETRUCHIO:
Pluck up thy spirits; look cheerfully upon me.
Here love; thou see'st how diligent I am
To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee:
I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
What, not a word? Nay, then thou lovest it not;
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
Here, take away this dish.

KATHARINA:
I pray you, let it stand.

PETRUCHIO:
The poorest service is repaid with thanks;
And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.

KATHARINA:
I thank you, sir.

HORTENSIO:
Signior Petruchio, fie! you are to blame.
Come, mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.

PETRUCHIO:

Haberdasher:
Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, this was moulded on a porringer;
A velvet dish: fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy:
Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,
A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap:
Away with it! come, let me have a bigger.

KATHARINA:
I'll have no bigger: this doth fit the time,
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these

PETRUCHIO:
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then.

HORTENSIO:

KATHARINA:
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;
And speak I will; I am no child, no babe:
Your betters have endured me say my mind,
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart concealing it will break,
And rather than it shall, I will be free
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, thou say'st true; it is a paltry cap,
A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie:
I love thee well, in that thou likest it not.

KATHARINA:
Love me or love me not, I like the cap;
And it I will have, or I will have none.

PETRUCHIO:
Thy gown? why, ay: come, tailor, let us see't.
O mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here?
What's this? a sleeve? 'tis like a demi-cannon:
What, up and down, carved like an apple-tart?
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,
Like to a censer in a barber's shop:
Why, what, i' devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?

HORTENSIO:

Tailor:
You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion and the time.

PETRUCHIO:
Marry, and did; but if you be remember'd,
I did not bid you mar it to the time.
Go, hop me over every kennel home,
For you shall hop without my custom, sir:
I'll none of it: hence! make your best of it.

KATHARINA:
I never saw a better-fashion'd gown,
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable:
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.

Tailor:
She says your worship means to make
a puppet of her.

PETRUCHIO:
O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread,
thou thimble,
Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou!
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?
Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant;
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou livest!
I tell thee, I, that thou hast marr'd her gown.

Tailor:
Your worship is deceived; the gown is made
Just as my master had direction:
Grumio gave order how it should be done.

GRUMIO:
I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.

Tailor:
But how did you desire it should be made?

GRUMIO:
Marry, sir, with needle and thread.

Tailor:
But did you not request to have it cut?

GRUMIO:
Thou hast faced many things.

Tailor:
I have.

GRUMIO:
Face not me: thou hast braved many men; brave not
me; I will neither be faced nor braved. I say unto
thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown; but I did
not bid him cut it to pieces: ergo, thou liest.

Tailor:
Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify

PETRUCHIO:
Read it.

GRUMIO:
The note lies in's throat, if he say I said so.

Tailor:

GRUMIO:
Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in
the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom
of brown thread: I said a gown.

PETRUCHIO:
Proceed.

Tailor:

GRUMIO:
I confess the cape.

Tailor:

GRUMIO:
I confess two sleeves.

Tailor:

PETRUCHIO:
Ay, there's the villany.

GRUMIO:
Error i' the bill, sir; error i' the bill.
I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and
sewed up again; and that I'll prove upon thee,
though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.

Tailor:
This is true that I say: an I had thee
in place where, thou shouldst know it.

GRUMIO:
I am for thee straight: take thou the
bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me.

HORTENSIO:
God-a-mercy, Grumio! then he shall have no odds.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.

GRUMIO:
You are i' the right, sir: 'tis for my mistress.

PETRUCHIO:
Go, take it up unto thy master's use.

GRUMIO:
Villain, not for thy life: take up my mistress'
gown for thy master's use!

PETRUCHIO:
Why, sir, what's your conceit in that?

GRUMIO:
O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for:
Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!
O, fie, fie, fie!

PETRUCHIO:

HORTENSIO:
Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow:
Take no unkindness of his hasty words:
Away! I say; commend me to thy master.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your father's
Even in these honest mean habiliments:
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor;
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich;
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
So honour peereth in the meanest habit.
What is the jay more precious than the lark,
Because his fathers are more beautiful?
Or is the adder better than the eel,
Because his painted skin contents the eye?
O, no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
For this poor furniture and mean array.
if thou account'st it shame. lay it on me;
And therefore frolic: we will hence forthwith,
To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
Go, call my men, and let us straight to him;
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot
Let's see; I think 'tis now some seven o'clock,
And well we may come there by dinner-time.

KATHARINA:
I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two;
And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.

PETRUCHIO:
It shall be seven ere I go to horse:
Look, what I speak, or do, or think to do,
You are still crossing it. Sirs, let't alone:
I will not go to-day; and ere I do,
It shall be what o'clock I say it is.

HORTENSIO:

TRANIO:
Sir, this is the house: please it you that I call?

Pedant:
Ay, what else? and but I be deceived
Signior Baptista may remember me,
Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.

TRANIO:
'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.

Pedant:
I warrant you.
But, sir, here comes your boy;
'Twere good he were school'd.

TRANIO:
Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you:
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.

BIONDELLO:
Tut, fear not me.

TRANIO:
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?

BIONDELLO:
I told him that your father was at Venice,
And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.

TRANIO:
Thou'rt a tall fellow: hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista: set your countenance, sir.
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of:
I pray you stand good father to me now,
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.

Pedant:
Soft son!
Sir, by your leave: having come to Padua
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love between your daughter and himself:
And, for the good report I hear of you
And for the love he beareth to your daughter
And she to him, to stay him not too long,
I am content, in a good father's care,
To have him match'd; and if you please to like
No worse than I, upon some agreement
Me shall you find ready and willing
With one consent to have her so bestow'd;
For curious I cannot be with you,
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.

BAPTISTA:
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say:
Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
Right true it is, your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter and she loveth him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections:
And therefore, if you say no more than this,
That like a father you will deal with him
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
The match is made, and all is done:
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.

TRANIO:
I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best
We be affied and such assurance ta'en
As shall with either part's agreement stand?

BAPTISTA:
Not in my house, Lucentio; for, you know,
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants:
Besides, old Gremio is hearkening still;
And happily we might be interrupted.

TRANIO:
Then at my lodging, an it like you:
There doth my father lie; and there, this night,
We'll pass the business privately and well.
Send for your daughter by your servant here:
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
The worst is this, that, at so slender warning,
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.

BAPTISTA:
It likes me well. Biondello, hie you home,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
And, if you will, tell what hath happened,
Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua,
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.

BIONDELLO:
I pray the gods she may with all my heart!

TRANIO:
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer:
Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa.

BAPTISTA:
I follow you.

BIONDELLO:
Cambio!

LUCENTIO:
What sayest thou, Biondello?

BIONDELLO:
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?

LUCENTIO:
Biondello, what of that?

BIONDELLO:
Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind, to
expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.

LUCENTIO:
I pray thee, moralize them.

BIONDELLO:
Then thus. Baptista is safe, talking with the
deceiving father of a deceitful son.

LUCENTIO:
And what of him?

BIONDELLO:
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.

LUCENTIO:
And then?

BIONDELLO:
The old priest of Saint Luke's church is at your
command at all hours.

LUCENTIO:
And what of all this?

BIONDELLO:
I cannot tell; expect they are busied about a
counterfeit assurance: take you assurance of her,
'cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum:' to the
church; take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient
honest witnesses: If this be not that you look for,
I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell for
ever and a day.

LUCENTIO:
Hearest thou, Biondello?

BIONDELLO:
I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an
afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to
stuff a rabbit; and so may you, sir: and so, adieu,
sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint
Luke's, to bid the priest be ready to come against
you come with your appendix.

LUCENTIO:
I may, and will, if she be so contented:
She will be pleased; then wherefore should I doubt?
Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her:
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.

PETRUCHIO:
Come on, i' God's name; once more toward our father's.
Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!

KATHARINA:
The moon! the sun: it is not moonlight now.

PETRUCHIO:
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.

KATHARINA:
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or ere I journey to your father's house.
Go on, and fetch our horses back again.
Evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd!

HORTENSIO:
Say as he says, or we shall never go.

KATHARINA:
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please:
An if you please to call it a rush-candle,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.

PETRUCHIO:
I say it is the moon.

KATHARINA:
I know it is the moon.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, then you lie: it is the blessed sun.

KATHARINA:
Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun:
But sun it is not, when you say it is not;
And the moon changes even as your mind.
What you will have it named, even that it is;
And so it shall be so for Katharina.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the bias.
But, soft! company is coming here.
Good morrow, gentle mistress: where away?
Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.

HORTENSIO:
A' will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.

KATHARINA:
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
Whither away, or where is thy abode?
Happy the parents of so fair a child;
Happier the man, whom favourable stars
Allot thee for his lovely bed-fellow!

PETRUCHIO:
Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad:
This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, wither'd,
And not a maiden, as thou say'st he is.

KATHARINA:
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
That have been so bedazzled with the sun
That everything I look on seemeth green:
Now I perceive thou art a reverend father;
Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.

PETRUCHIO:
Do, good old grandsire; and withal make known
Which way thou travellest: if along with us,
We shall be joyful of thy company.

VINCENTIO:
Fair sir, and you my merry mistress,
That with your strange encounter much amazed me,
My name is call'd Vincentio; my dwelling Pisa;
And bound I am to Padua; there to visit
A son of mine, which long I have not seen.

PETRUCHIO:
What is his name?

VINCENTIO:
Lucentio, gentle sir.

PETRUCHIO:
Happily we met; the happier for thy son.
And now by law, as well as reverend age,
I may entitle thee my loving father:
The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,
Nor be grieved: she is of good esteem,
Her dowery wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified as may beseem
The spouse of any noble gentleman.
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.

VINCENTIO:
But is it true? or else is it your pleasure,
Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
Upon the company you overtake?

HORTENSIO:
I do assure thee, father, so it is.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, go along, and see the truth hereof;
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.

HORTENSIO:
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.
Have to my widow! and if she be froward,
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.

BIONDELLO:
Softly and swiftly, sir; for the priest is ready.

LUCENTIO:
I fly, Biondello: but they may chance to need thee
at home; therefore leave us.

BIONDELLO:
Nay, faith, I'll see the church o' your back; and
then come back to my master's as soon as I can.

GREMIO:
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.

PETRUCHIO:
Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house:
My father's bears more toward the market-place;
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.

VINCENTIO:
You shall not choose but drink before you go:
I think I shall command your welcome here,
And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.

GREMIO:
They're busy within; you were best knock louder.

Pedant:
What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?

VINCENTIO:
Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?

Pedant:
He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.

VINCENTIO:
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two, to
make merry withal?

Pedant:
Keep your hundred pounds to yourself: he shall
need none, so long as I live.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.
Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances,
I pray you, tell Signior Lucentio that his father is
come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.

Pedant:
Thou liest: his father is come from Padua and here
looking out at the window.

VINCENTIO:
Art thou his father?

Pedant:
Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may believe her.

PETRUCHIO:

Pedant:
Lay hands on the villain: I believe a' means to
cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.

BIONDELLO:
I have seen them in the church together: God send
'em good shipping! But who is here? mine old
master Vincentio! now we are undone and brought to nothing.

VINCENTIO:

BIONDELLO:
Hope I may choose, sir.

VINCENTIO:
Come hither, you rogue. What, have you forgot me?

BIONDELLO:
Forgot you! no, sir: I could not forget you, for I
never saw you before in all my life.

VINCENTIO:
What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see
thy master's father, Vincentio?

BIONDELLO:
What, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir:
see where he looks out of the window.

VINCENTIO:
Is't so, indeed.

BIONDELLO:
Help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.

Pedant:
Help, son! help, Signior Baptista!

PETRUCHIO:
Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside and see the end of
this controversy.

TRANIO:
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?

VINCENTIO:
What am I, sir! nay, what are you, sir? O immortal
gods! O fine villain! A silken doublet! a velvet
hose! a scarlet cloak! and a copatain hat! O, I
am undone! I am undone! while I play the good
husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at
the university.

TRANIO:
How now! what's the matter?

BAPTISTA:
What, is the man lunatic?

TRANIO:
Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your
habit, but your words show you a madman. Why, sir,
what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I
thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.

VINCENTIO:
Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.

BAPTISTA:
You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do
you think is his name?

VINCENTIO:
His name! as if I knew not his name: I have brought
him up ever since he was three years old, and his
name is Tranio.

Pedant:
Away, away, mad ass! his name is Lucentio and he is
mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.

VINCENTIO:
Lucentio! O, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold
on him, I charge you, in the duke's name. O, my
son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?

TRANIO:
Call forth an officer.
Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista,
I charge you see that he be forthcoming.

VINCENTIO:
Carry me to the gaol!

GREMIO:
Stay, officer: he shall not go to prison.

BAPTISTA:
Talk not, Signior Gremio: I say he shall go to prison.

GREMIO:
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be
cony-catched in this business: I dare swear this
is the right Vincentio.

Pedant:
Swear, if thou darest.

GREMIO:
Nay, I dare not swear it.

TRANIO:
Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.

GREMIO:
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.

BAPTISTA:
Away with the dotard! to the gaol with him!

VINCENTIO:
Thus strangers may be hailed and abused: O
monstrous villain!

BIONDELLO:
O! we are spoiled and--yonder he is: deny him,
forswear him, or else we are all undone.

LUCENTIO:

VINCENTIO:
Lives my sweet son?

BIANCA:
Pardon, dear father.

BAPTISTA:
How hast thou offended?
Where is Lucentio?

LUCENTIO:
Here's Lucentio,
Right son to the right Vincentio;
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.

GREMIO:
Here's packing, with a witness to deceive us all!

VINCENTIO:
Where is that damned villain Tranio,
That faced and braved me in this matter so?

BAPTISTA:
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?

BIANCA:
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.

LUCENTIO:
Love wrought these miracles. Bianca's love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town;
And happily I have arrived at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
What Tranio did, myself enforced him to;
Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.

VINCENTIO:
I'll slit the villain's nose, that would have sent
me to the gaol.

BAPTISTA:
But do you hear, sir? have you married my daughter
without asking my good will?

VINCENTIO:
Fear not, Baptista; we will content you, go to: but
I will in, to be revenged for this villany.

BAPTISTA:
And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.

LUCENTIO:
Look not pale, Bianca; thy father will not frown.

GREMIO:
My cake is dough; but I'll in among the rest,
Out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.

KATHARINA:
Husband, let's follow, to see the end of this ado.

PETRUCHIO:
First kiss me, Kate, and we will.

KATHARINA:
What, in the midst of the street?

PETRUCHIO:
What, art thou ashamed of me?

KATHARINA:
No, sir, God forbid; but ashamed to kiss.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, then let's home again. Come, sirrah, let's away.

KATHARINA:
Nay, I will give thee a kiss: now pray thee, love, stay.

PETRUCHIO:
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate:
Better once than never, for never too late.

LUCENTIO:
At last, though long, our jarring notes agree:
And time it is, when raging war is done,
To smile at scapes and perils overblown.
My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.
Brother Petruchio, sister Katharina,
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house:
My banquet is to close our stomachs up,
After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down;
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.

PETRUCHIO:
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!

BAPTISTA:
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.

PETRUCHIO:
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.

HORTENSIO:
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.

Widow:
Then never trust me, if I be afeard.

PETRUCHIO:
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.

Widow:
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.

PETRUCHIO:
Roundly replied.

KATHARINA:
Mistress, how mean you that?

Widow:
Thus I conceive by him.

PETRUCHIO:
Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?

HORTENSIO:
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.

PETRUCHIO:
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.

KATHARINA:
'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round:'
I pray you, tell me what you meant by that.

Widow:
Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe:
And now you know my meaning,

KATHARINA:
A very mean meaning.

Widow:
Right, I mean you.

KATHARINA:
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.

PETRUCHIO:
To her, Kate!

HORTENSIO:
To her, widow!

PETRUCHIO:
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.

HORTENSIO:
That's my office.

PETRUCHIO:
Spoke like an officer; ha' to thee, lad!

BAPTISTA:
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?

GREMIO:
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.

BIANCA:
Head, and butt! an hasty-witted body
Would say your head and butt were head and horn.

VINCENTIO:
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awaken'd you?

BIANCA:
Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep again.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, that you shall not: since you have begun,
Have at you for a bitter jest or two!

BIANCA:
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush;
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
You are welcome all.

PETRUCHIO:
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio.
This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;
Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.

TRANIO:
O, sir, Lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
Which runs himself and catches for his master.

PETRUCHIO:
A good swift simile, but something currish.

TRANIO:
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself:
'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.

BAPTISTA:
O ho, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.

LUCENTIO:
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.

HORTENSIO:
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?

PETRUCHIO:
A' has a little gall'd me, I confess;
And, as the jest did glance away from me,
'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.

BAPTISTA:
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, I say no: and therefore for assurance
Let's each one send unto his wife;
And he whose wife is most obedient
To come at first when he doth send for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propose.

HORTENSIO:
Content. What is the wager?

LUCENTIO:
Twenty crowns.

PETRUCHIO:
Twenty crowns!
I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
But twenty times so much upon my wife.

LUCENTIO:
A hundred then.

HORTENSIO:
Content.

PETRUCHIO:
A match! 'tis done.

HORTENSIO:
Who shall begin?

LUCENTIO:
That will I.
Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.

BIONDELLO:
I go.

BAPTISTA:
Son, I'll be your half, Bianca comes.

LUCENTIO:
I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself.
How now! what news?

BIONDELLO:
Sir, my mistress sends you word
That she is busy and she cannot come.

PETRUCHIO:
How! she is busy and she cannot come!
Is that an answer?

GREMIO:
Ay, and a kind one too:
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.

PETRUCHIO:
I hope better.

HORTENSIO:
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife
To come to me forthwith.

PETRUCHIO:
O, ho! entreat her!
Nay, then she must needs come.

HORTENSIO:
I am afraid, sir,
Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
Now, where's my wife?

BIONDELLO:
She says you have some goodly jest in hand:
She will not come: she bids you come to her.

PETRUCHIO:
Worse and worse; she will not come! O vile,
Intolerable, not to be endured!
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress;
Say, I command her to come to me.

HORTENSIO:
I know her answer.

PETRUCHIO:
What?

HORTENSIO:
She will not.

PETRUCHIO:
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

BAPTISTA:
Now, by my holidame, here comes Katharina!

KATHARINA:
What is your will, sir, that you send for me?

PETRUCHIO:
Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife?

KATHARINA:
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.

PETRUCHIO:
Go fetch them hither: if they deny to come.
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands:
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.

LUCENTIO:
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.

HORTENSIO:
And so it is: I wonder what it bodes.

PETRUCHIO:
Marry, peace it bodes, and love and quiet life,
And awful rule and right supremacy;
And, to be short, what not, that's sweet and happy?

BAPTISTA:
Now, fair befal thee, good Petruchio!
The wager thou hast won; and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changed, as she had never been.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, I will win my wager better yet
And show more sign of her obedience,
Her new-built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes and brings your froward wives
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
Katharina, that cap of yours becomes you not:
Off with that bauble, throw it under-foot.

Widow:
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,
Till I be brought to such a silly pass!

BIANCA:
Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?

LUCENTIO:
I would your duty were as foolish too:
The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
Hath cost me an hundred crowns since supper-time.

BIANCA:
The more fool you, for laying on my duty.

PETRUCHIO:
Katharina, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.

Widow:
Come, come, you're mocking: we will have no telling.

PETRUCHIO:
Come on, I say; and first begin with her.

Widow:
She shall not.

PETRUCHIO:
I say she shall: and first begin with her.

KATHARINA:
Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes,
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor:
It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,
Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty;
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance commits his body
To painful labour both by sea and land,
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe;
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks and true obedience;
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince
Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will,
What is she but a foul contending rebel
And graceless traitor to her loving lord?
I am ashamed that women are so simple
To offer war where they should kneel for peace;
Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway,
When they are bound to serve, love and obey.
Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions and our hearts
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms!
My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason haply more,
To bandy word for word and frown for frown;
But now I see our lances are but straws,
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husband's foot:
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready; may it do him ease.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.

LUCENTIO:
Well, go thy ways, old lad; for thou shalt ha't.

VINCENTIO:
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.

LUCENTIO:
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, Kate, we'll to bed.
We three are married, but you two are sped.
'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white;
And, being a winner, God give you good night!

HORTENSIO:
Now, go thy ways; thou hast tamed a curst shrew.

LUCENTIO:
'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.

Master:
Boatswain!

Boatswain:
Here, master: what cheer?

Master:
Good, speak to the mariners: fall to't, yarely,
or we run ourselves aground: bestir, bestir.

Boatswain:
Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts!
yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to the
master's whistle. Blow, till thou burst thy wind,
if room enough!

ALONSO:
Good boatswain, have care. Where's the master?
Play the men.

Boatswain:
I pray now, keep below.

ANTONIO:
Where is the master, boatswain?

Boatswain:
Do you not hear him? You mar our labour: keep your
cabins: you do assist the storm.

GONZALO:
Nay, good, be patient.

Boatswain:
When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers
for the name of king? To cabin: silence! trouble us not.

GONZALO:
Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.

Boatswain:
None that I more love than myself. You are a
counsellor; if you can command these elements to
silence, and work the peace of the present, we will
not hand a rope more; use your authority: if you
cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and make
yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of
the hour, if it so hap. Cheerly, good hearts! Out
of our way, I say.

GONZALO:
I have great comfort from this fellow: methinks he
hath no drowning mark upon him; his complexion is
perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his
hanging: make the rope of his destiny our cable,
for our own doth little advantage. If he be not
born to be hanged, our case is miserable.

Boatswain:
Down with the topmast! yare! lower, lower! Bring
her to try with main-course.
A plague upon this howling! they are louder than
the weather or our office.
Yet again! what do you here? Shall we give o'er
and drown? Have you a mind to sink?

SEBASTIAN:
A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous,
incharitable dog!

Boatswain:
Work you then.

ANTONIO:
Hang, cur! hang, you whoreson, insolent noisemaker!
We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.

GONZALO:
I'll warrant him for drowning; though the ship were
no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an
unstanched wench.

Boatswain:
Lay her a-hold, a-hold! set her two courses off to
sea again; lay her off.

Mariners:
All lost! to prayers, to prayers! all lost!

Boatswain:
What, must our mouths be cold?

GONZALO:
The king and prince at prayers! let's assist them,
For our case is as theirs.

SEBASTIAN:
I'm out of patience.

ANTONIO:
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards:
This wide-chapp'd rascal--would thou mightst lie drowning
The washing of ten tides!

GONZALO:
He'll be hang'd yet,
Though every drop of water swear against it
And gape at widest to glut him.

ANTONIO:
Let's all sink with the king.

SEBASTIAN:
Let's take leave of him.

GONZALO:
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an
acre of barren ground, long heath, brown furze, any
thing. The wills above be done! but I would fain
die a dry death.

MIRANDA:
If by your art, my dearest father, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
But that the sea, mounting to the welkin's cheek,
Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered
With those that I saw suffer: a brave vessel,
Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her,
Dash'd all to pieces. O, the cry did knock
Against my very heart. Poor souls, they perish'd.
Had I been any god of power, I would
Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
It should the good ship so have swallow'd and
The fraughting souls within her.

PROSPERO:
Be collected:
No more amazement: tell your piteous heart
There's no harm done.

MIRANDA:
O, woe the day!

PROSPERO:
No harm.
I have done nothing but in care of thee,
Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
Art ignorant of what thou art, nought knowing
Of whence I am, nor that I am more better
Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell,
And thy no greater father.

MIRANDA:
More to know
Did never meddle with my thoughts.

PROSPERO:
'Tis time
I should inform thee farther. Lend thy hand,
And pluck my magic garment from me. So:
Lie there, my art. Wipe thou thine eyes; have comfort.
The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch'd
The very virtue of compassion in thee,
I have with such provision in mine art
So safely ordered that there is no soul--
No, not so much perdition as an hair
Betid to any creature in the vessel
Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw'st sink. Sit down;
For thou must now know farther.

MIRANDA:
You have often
Begun to tell me what I am, but stopp'd
And left me to a bootless inquisition,
Concluding 'Stay: not yet.'

PROSPERO:
The hour's now come;
The very minute bids thee ope thine ear;
Obey and be attentive. Canst thou remember
A time before we came unto this cell?
I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not
Out three years old.

MIRANDA:
Certainly, sir, I can.

PROSPERO:
By what? by any other house or person?
Of any thing the image tell me that
Hath kept with thy remembrance.

MIRANDA:
'Tis far off
And rather like a dream than an assurance
That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
Four or five women once that tended me?

PROSPERO:
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it
That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else
In the dark backward and abysm of time?
If thou remember'st aught ere thou camest here,
How thou camest here thou mayst.

MIRANDA:
But that I do not.

PROSPERO:
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
Thy father was the Duke of Milan and
A prince of power.

MIRANDA:
Sir, are not you my father?

PROSPERO:
Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
She said thou wast my daughter; and thy father
Was Duke of Milan; and thou his only heir
And princess no worse issued.

MIRANDA:
O the heavens!
What foul play had we, that we came from thence?
Or blessed was't we did?

PROSPERO:
Both, both, my girl:
By foul play, as thou say'st, were we heaved thence,
But blessedly holp hither.

MIRANDA:
O, my heart bleeds
To think o' the teen that I have turn'd you to,
Which is from my remembrance! Please you, farther.

PROSPERO:
My brother and thy uncle, call'd Antonio--
I pray thee, mark me--that a brother should
Be so perfidious!--he whom next thyself
Of all the world I loved and to him put
The manage of my state; as at that time
Through all the signories it was the first
And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed
In dignity, and for the liberal arts
Without a parallel; those being all my study,
The government I cast upon my brother
And to my state grew stranger, being transported
And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle--
Dost thou attend me?

MIRANDA:
Sir, most heedfully.

PROSPERO:
Being once perfected how to grant suits,
How to deny them, who to advance and who
To trash for over-topping, new created
The creatures that were mine, I say, or changed 'em,
Or else new form'd 'em; having both the key
Of officer and office, set all hearts i' the state
To what tune pleased his ear; that now he was
The ivy which had hid my princely trunk,
And suck'd my verdure out on't. Thou attend'st not.

MIRANDA:
O, good sir, I do.

PROSPERO:
I pray thee, mark me.
I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
To closeness and the bettering of my mind
With that which, but by being so retired,
O'er-prized all popular rate, in my false brother
Awaked an evil nature; and my trust,
Like a good parent, did beget of him
A falsehood in its contrary as great
As my trust was; which had indeed no limit,
A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded,
Not only with what my revenue yielded,
But what my power might else exact, like one
Who having into truth, by telling of it,
Made such a sinner of his memory,
To credit his own lie, he did believe
He was indeed the duke; out o' the substitution
And executing the outward face of royalty,
With all prerogative: hence his ambition growing--
Dost thou hear?

MIRANDA:
Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.

PROSPERO:
To have no screen between this part he play'd
And him he play'd it for, he needs will be
Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library
Was dukedom large enough: of temporal royalties
He thinks me now incapable; confederates--
So dry he was for sway--wi' the King of Naples
To give him annual tribute, do him homage,
Subject his coronet to his crown and bend
The dukedom yet unbow'd--alas, poor Milan!--
To most ignoble stooping.

MIRANDA:
O the heavens!

PROSPERO:
Mark his condition and the event; then tell me
If this might be a brother.

MIRANDA:
I should sin
To think but nobly of my grandmother:
Good wombs have borne bad sons.

PROSPERO:
Now the condition.
The King of Naples, being an enemy
To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit;
Which was, that he, in lieu o' the premises
Of homage and I know not how much tribute,
Should presently extirpate me and mine
Out of the dukedom and confer fair Milan
With all the honours on my brother: whereon,
A treacherous army levied, one midnight
Fated to the purpose did Antonio open
The gates of Milan, and, i' the dead of darkness,
The ministers for the purpose hurried thence
Me and thy crying self.

MIRANDA:
Alack, for pity!
I, not remembering how I cried out then,
Will cry it o'er again: it is a hint
That wrings mine eyes to't.

PROSPERO:
Hear a little further
And then I'll bring thee to the present business
Which now's upon's; without the which this story
Were most impertinent.

MIRANDA:
Wherefore did they not
That hour destroy us?

PROSPERO:
Well demanded, wench:
My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,
So dear the love my people bore me, nor set
A mark so bloody on the business, but
With colours fairer painted their foul ends.
In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,
Bore us some leagues to sea; where they prepared
A rotten carcass of a boat, not rigg'd,
Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
Instinctively had quit it: there they hoist us,
To cry to the sea that roar'd to us, to sigh
To the winds whose pity, sighing back again,
Did us but loving wrong.

MIRANDA:
Alack, what trouble
Was I then to you!

PROSPERO:
O, a cherubim
Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile.
Infused with a fortitude from heaven,
When I have deck'd the sea with drops full salt,
Under my burthen groan'd; which raised in me
An undergoing stomach, to bear up
Against what should ensue.

MIRANDA:
How came we ashore?

PROSPERO:
By Providence divine.
Some food we had and some fresh water that
A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,
Out of his charity, being then appointed
Master of this design, did give us, with
Rich garments, linens, stuffs and necessaries,
Which since have steaded much; so, of his gentleness,
Knowing I loved my books, he furnish'd me
From mine own library with volumes that
I prize above my dukedom.

MIRANDA:
Would I might
But ever see that man!

PROSPERO:
Now I arise:
Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
Here in this island we arrived; and here
Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
Than other princesses can that have more time
For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.

MIRANDA:
Heavens thank you for't! And now, I pray you, sir,
For still 'tis beating in my mind, your reason
For raising this sea-storm?

PROSPERO:
Know thus far forth.
By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune,
Now my dear lady, hath mine enemies
Brought to this shore; and by my prescience
I find my zenith doth depend upon
A most auspicious star, whose influence
If now I court not but omit, my fortunes
Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions:
Thou art inclined to sleep; 'tis a good dulness,
And give it way: I know thou canst not choose.
Come away, servant, come. I am ready now.
Approach, my Ariel, come.

ARIEL:
All hail, great master! grave sir, hail! I come
To answer thy best pleasure; be't to fly,
To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
On the curl'd clouds, to thy strong bidding task
Ariel and all his quality.

PROSPERO:
Hast thou, spirit,
Perform'd to point the tempest that I bade thee?

ARIEL:
To every article.
I boarded the king's ship; now on the beak,
Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
I flamed amazement: sometime I'ld divide,
And burn in many places; on the topmast,
The yards and bowsprit, would I flame distinctly,
Then meet and join. Jove's lightnings, the precursors
O' the dreadful thunder-claps, more momentary
And sight-outrunning were not; the fire and cracks
Of sulphurous roaring the most mighty Neptune
Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,
Yea, his dread trident shake.

PROSPERO:
My brave spirit!
Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
Would not infect his reason?

ARIEL:
Not a soul
But felt a fever of the mad and play'd
Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners
Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,
Then all afire with me: the king's son, Ferdinand,
With hair up-staring,--then like reeds, not hair,--
Was the first man that leap'd; cried, 'Hell is empty
And all the devils are here.'

PROSPERO:
Why that's my spirit!
But was not this nigh shore?

ARIEL:
Close by, my master.

PROSPERO:
But are they, Ariel, safe?

ARIEL:
Not a hair perish'd;
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
But fresher than before: and, as thou badest me,
In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.
The king's son have I landed by himself;
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
In an odd angle of the isle and sitting,
His arms in this sad knot.

PROSPERO:
Of the king's ship
The mariners say how thou hast disposed
And all the rest o' the fleet.

ARIEL:
Safely in harbour
Is the king's ship; in the deep nook, where once
Thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew
From the still-vex'd Bermoothes, there she's hid:
The mariners all under hatches stow'd;
Who, with a charm join'd to their suffer'd labour,
I have left asleep; and for the rest o' the fleet
Which I dispersed, they all have met again
And are upon the Mediterranean flote,
Bound sadly home for Naples,
Supposing that they saw the king's ship wreck'd
And his great person perish.

PROSPERO:
Ariel, thy charge
Exactly is perform'd: but there's more work.
What is the time o' the day?

ARIEL:
Past the mid season.

PROSPERO:
At least two glasses. The time 'twixt six and now
Must by us both be spent most preciously.

ARIEL:
Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,
Which is not yet perform'd me.

PROSPERO:
How now? moody?
What is't thou canst demand?

ARIEL:
My liberty.

PROSPERO:
Before the time be out? no more!

ARIEL:
I prithee,
Remember I have done thee worthy service;
Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, served
Without or grudge or grumblings: thou didst promise
To bate me a full year.

PROSPERO:
Dost thou forget
From what a torment I did free thee?

ARIEL:
No.

PROSPERO:
Thou dost, and think'st it much to tread the ooze
Of the salt deep,
To run upon the sharp wind of the north,
To do me business in the veins o' the earth
When it is baked with frost.

ARIEL:
I do not, sir.

PROSPERO:
Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot
The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
Was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her?

ARIEL:
No, sir.

PROSPERO:
Thou hast. Where was she born? speak; tell me.

ARIEL:
Sir, in Argier.

PROSPERO:
O, was she so? I must
Once in a month recount what thou hast been,
Which thou forget'st. This damn'd witch Sycorax,
For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible
To enter human hearing, from Argier,
Thou know'st, was banish'd: for one thing she did
They would not take her life. Is not this true?

ARIEL:
Ay, sir.

PROSPERO:
This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child
And here was left by the sailors. Thou, my slave,
As thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant;
And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate
To act her earthy and abhorr'd commands,
Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee,
By help of her more potent ministers
And in her most unmitigable rage,
Into a cloven pine; within which rift
Imprison'd thou didst painfully remain
A dozen years; within which space she died
And left thee there; where thou didst vent thy groans
As fast as mill-wheels strike. Then was this island--
Save for the son that she did litter here,
A freckled whelp hag-born--not honour'd with
A human shape.

ARIEL:
Yes, Caliban her son.

PROSPERO:
Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban
Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know'st
What torment I did find thee in; thy groans
Did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts
Of ever angry bears: it was a torment
To lay upon the damn'd, which Sycorax
Could not again undo: it was mine art,
When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape
The pine and let thee out.

ARIEL:
I thank thee, master.

PROSPERO:
If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak
And peg thee in his knotty entrails till
Thou hast howl'd away twelve winters.

ARIEL:
Pardon, master;
I will be correspondent to command
And do my spiriting gently.

PROSPERO:
Do so, and after two days
I will discharge thee.

ARIEL:
That's my noble master!
What shall I do? say what; what shall I do?

PROSPERO:
Go make thyself like a nymph o' the sea: be subject
To no sight but thine and mine, invisible
To every eyeball else. Go take this shape
And hither come in't: go, hence with diligence!
Awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well; Awake!

MIRANDA:
The strangeness of your story put
Heaviness in me.

PROSPERO:
Shake it off. Come on;
We'll visit Caliban my slave, who never
Yields us kind answer.

MIRANDA:
'Tis a villain, sir,
I do not love to look on.

PROSPERO:
But, as 'tis,
We cannot miss him: he does make our fire,
Fetch in our wood and serves in offices
That profit us. What, ho! slave! Caliban!
Thou earth, thou! speak.

CALIBAN:

PROSPERO:
Come forth, I say! there's other business for thee:
Come, thou tortoise! when?
Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,
Hark in thine ear.

ARIEL:
My lord it shall be done.

PROSPERO:
Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
Upon thy wicked dam, come forth!

CALIBAN:
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd
With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
Drop on you both! a south-west blow on ye
And blister you all o'er!

PROSPERO:
For this, be sure, to-night thou shalt have cramps,
Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up; urchins
Shall, for that vast of night that they may work,
All exercise on thee; thou shalt be pinch'd
As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
Than bees that made 'em.

CALIBAN:
I must eat my dinner.
This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother,
Which thou takest from me. When thou camest first,
Thou strokedst me and madest much of me, wouldst give me
Water with berries in't, and teach me how
To name the bigger light, and how the less,
That burn by day and night: and then I loved thee
And show'd thee all the qualities o' the isle,
The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren place and fertile:
Cursed be I that did so! All the charms
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!
For I am all the subjects that you have,
Which first was mine own king: and here you sty me
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
The rest o' the island.

PROSPERO:
Thou most lying slave,
Whom stripes may move, not kindness! I have used thee,
Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee
In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate
The honour of my child.

CALIBAN:
O ho, O ho! would't had been done!
Thou didst prevent me; I had peopled else
This isle with Calibans.

PROSPERO:
Abhorred slave,
Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
One thing or other: when thou didst not, savage,
Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like
A thing most brutish, I endow'd thy purposes
With words that made them known. But thy vile race,
Though thou didst learn, had that in't which
good natures
Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
Deservedly confined into this rock,
Who hadst deserved more than a prison.

CALIBAN:
You taught me language; and my profit on't
Is, I know how to curse. The red plague rid you
For learning me your language!

PROSPERO:
Hag-seed, hence!
Fetch us in fuel; and be quick, thou'rt best,
To answer other business. Shrug'st thou, malice?
If thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly
What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps,
Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar
That beasts shall tremble at thy din.

CALIBAN:
No, pray thee.
I must obey: his art is of such power,
It would control my dam's god, Setebos,
and make a vassal of him.

PROSPERO:
So, slave; hence!
Come unto these yellow sands,
And then take hands:
Courtsied when you have and kiss'd
The wild waves whist,
Foot it featly here and there;
And, sweet sprites, the burthen bear.
Hark, hark!

FERDINAND:
Where should this music be? i' the air or the earth?
It sounds no more: and sure, it waits upon
Some god o' the island. Sitting on a bank,
Weeping again the king my father's wreck,
This music crept by me upon the waters,
Allaying both their fury and my passion
With its sweet air: thence I have follow'd it,
Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
No, it begins again.
Full fathom five thy father lies;
Of his bones are coral made;
Those are pearls that were his eyes:
Nothing of him that doth fade
But doth suffer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange.
Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell
Hark! now I hear them,--Ding-dong, bell.

FERDINAND:
The ditty does remember my drown'd father.
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.

PROSPERO:
The fringed curtains of thine eye advance
And say what thou seest yond.

MIRANDA:
What is't? a spirit?
Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
It carries a brave form. But 'tis a spirit.

PROSPERO:
No, wench; it eats and sleeps and hath such senses
As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest
Was in the wreck; and, but he's something stain'd
With grief that's beauty's canker, thou mightst call him
A goodly person: he hath lost his fellows
And strays about to find 'em.

MIRANDA:
I might call him
A thing divine, for nothing natural
I ever saw so noble.

PROSPERO:

FERDINAND:
Most sure, the goddess
On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer
May know if you remain upon this island;
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here: my prime request,
Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder!
If you be maid or no?

MIRANDA:
No wonder, sir;
But certainly a maid.

FERDINAND:
My language! heavens!
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Were I but where 'tis spoken.

PROSPERO:
How? the best?
What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard thee?

FERDINAND:
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
And that he does I weep: myself am Naples,
Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
The king my father wreck'd.

MIRANDA:
Alack, for mercy!

FERDINAND:
Yes, faith, and all his lords; the Duke of Milan
And his brave son being twain.

PROSPERO:

MIRANDA:
Why speaks my father so ungently? This
Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first
That e'er I sigh'd for: pity move my father
To be inclined my way!

FERDINAND:
O, if a virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
The queen of Naples.

PROSPERO:
Soft, sir! one word more.
They are both in either's powers; but this swift business
I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
Make the prize light.
One word more; I charge thee
That thou attend me: thou dost here usurp
The name thou owest not; and hast put thyself
Upon this island as a spy, to win it
From me, the lord on't.

FERDINAND:
No, as I am a man.

MIRANDA:
There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple:
If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
Good things will strive to dwell with't.

PROSPERO:
Follow me.
Speak not you for him; he's a traitor. Come;
I'll manacle thy neck and feet together:
Sea-water shalt thou drink; thy food shall be
The fresh-brook muscles, wither'd roots and husks
Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.

FERDINAND:
No;
I will resist such entertainment till
Mine enemy has more power.

MIRANDA:
O dear father,
Make not too rash a trial of him, for
He's gentle and not fearful.

PROSPERO:
What? I say,
My foot my tutor? Put thy sword up, traitor;
Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience
Is so possess'd with guilt: come from thy ward,
For I can here disarm thee with this stick
And make thy weapon drop.

MIRANDA:
Beseech you, father.

PROSPERO:
Hence! hang not on my garments.

MIRANDA:
Sir, have pity;
I'll be his surety.

PROSPERO:
Silence! one word more
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What!
An advocate for an imposter! hush!
Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he,
Having seen but him and Caliban: foolish wench!
To the most of men this is a Caliban
And they to him are angels.

MIRANDA:
My affections
Are then most humble; I have no ambition
To see a goodlier man.

PROSPERO:
Come on; obey:
Thy nerves are in their infancy again
And have no vigour in them.

FERDINAND:
So they are;
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wreck of all my friends, nor this man's threats,
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid: all corners else o' the earth
Let liberty make use of; space enough
Have I in such a prison.

PROSPERO:

MIRANDA:
Be of comfort;
My father's of a better nature, sir,
Than he appears by speech: this is unwonted
Which now came from him.

PROSPERO:
Thou shalt be free
As mountain winds: but then exactly do
All points of my command.

ARIEL:
To the syllable.

PROSPERO:
Come, follow. Speak not for him.

GONZALO:
Beseech you, sir, be merry; you have cause,
So have we all, of joy; for our escape
Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
Is common; every day some sailor's wife,
The masters of some merchant and the merchant
Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
I mean our preservation, few in millions
Can speak like us: then wisely, good sir, weigh
Our sorrow with our comfort.

ALONSO:
Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN:
He receives comfort like cold porridge.

ANTONIO:
The visitor will not give him o'er so.

SEBASTIAN:
Look he's winding up the watch of his wit;
by and by it will strike.

GONZALO:
Sir,--

SEBASTIAN:
One: tell.

GONZALO:
When every grief is entertain'd that's offer'd,
Comes to the entertainer--

SEBASTIAN:
A dollar.

GONZALO:
Dolour comes to him, indeed: you
have spoken truer than you purposed.

SEBASTIAN:
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.

GONZALO:
Therefore, my lord,--

ANTONIO:
Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!

ALONSO:
I prithee, spare.

GONZALO:
Well, I have done: but yet,--

SEBASTIAN:
He will be talking.

ANTONIO:
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good
wager, first begins to crow?

SEBASTIAN:
The old cock.

ANTONIO:
The cockerel.

SEBASTIAN:
Done. The wager?

ANTONIO:
A laughter.

SEBASTIAN:
A match!

ADRIAN:
Though this island seem to be desert,--

SEBASTIAN:
Ha, ha, ha! So, you're paid.

ADRIAN:
Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible,--

SEBASTIAN:
Yet,--

ADRIAN:
Yet,--

ANTONIO:
He could not miss't.

ADRIAN:
It must needs be of subtle, tender and delicate
temperance.

ANTONIO:
Temperance was a delicate wench.

SEBASTIAN:
Ay, and a subtle; as he most learnedly delivered.

ADRIAN:
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.

SEBASTIAN:
As if it had lungs and rotten ones.

ANTONIO:
Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.

GONZALO:
Here is everything advantageous to life.

ANTONIO:
True; save means to live.

SEBASTIAN:
Of that there's none, or little.

GONZALO:
How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!

ANTONIO:
The ground indeed is tawny.

SEBASTIAN:
With an eye of green in't.

ANTONIO:
He misses not much.

SEBASTIAN:
No; he doth but mistake the truth totally.

GONZALO:
But the rarity of it is,--which is indeed almost
beyond credit,--

SEBASTIAN:
As many vouched rarities are.

GONZALO:
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in
the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and
glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with
salt water.

ANTONIO:
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not
say he lies?

SEBASTIAN:
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report

GONZALO:
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we
put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of
the king's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.

SEBASTIAN:
'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.

ADRIAN:
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to
their queen.

GONZALO:
Not since widow Dido's time.

ANTONIO:
Widow! a pox o' that! How came that widow in?
widow Dido!

SEBASTIAN:
What if he had said 'widower AEneas' too? Good Lord,
how you take it!

ADRIAN:
'Widow Dido' said you? you make me study of that:
she was of Carthage, not of Tunis.

GONZALO:
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.

ADRIAN:
Carthage?

GONZALO:
I assure you, Carthage.

SEBASTIAN:
His word is more than the miraculous harp; he hath
raised the wall and houses too.

ANTONIO:
What impossible matter will he make easy next?

SEBASTIAN:
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket
and give it his son for an apple.

ANTONIO:
And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
forth more islands.

GONZALO:
Ay.

ANTONIO:
Why, in good time.

GONZALO:
Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now
as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage
of your daughter, who is now queen.

ANTONIO:
And the rarest that e'er came there.

SEBASTIAN:
Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.

ANTONIO:
O, widow Dido! ay, widow Dido.

GONZALO:
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
wore it? I mean, in a sort.

ANTONIO:
That sort was well fished for.

GONZALO:
When I wore it at your daughter's marriage?

ALONSO:
You cram these words into mine ears against
The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
Married my daughter there! for, coming thence,
My son is lost and, in my rate, she too,
Who is so far from Italy removed
I ne'er again shall see her. O thou mine heir
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
Hath made his meal on thee?

FRANCISCO:
Sir, he may live:
I saw him beat the surges under him,
And ride upon their backs; he trod the water,
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
The surge most swoln that met him; his bold head
'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
To the shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bow'd,
As stooping to relieve him: I not doubt
He came alive to land.

ALONSO:
No, no, he's gone.

SEBASTIAN:
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
But rather lose her to an African;
Where she at least is banish'd from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet the grief on't.

ALONSO:
Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN:
You were kneel'd to and importuned otherwise
By all of us, and the fair soul herself
Weigh'd between loathness and obedience, at
Which end o' the beam should bow. We have lost your
son,
I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have
More widows in them of this business' making
Than we bring men to comfort them:
The fault's your own.

ALONSO:
So is the dear'st o' the loss.

GONZALO:
My lord Sebastian,
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness
And time to speak it in: you rub the sore,
When you should bring the plaster.

SEBASTIAN:
Very well.

ANTONIO:
And most chirurgeonly.

GONZALO:
It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
When you are cloudy.

SEBASTIAN:
Foul weather?

ANTONIO:
Very foul.

GONZALO:
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord,--

ANTONIO:
He'ld sow't with nettle-seed.

SEBASTIAN:
Or docks, or mallows.

GONZALO:
And were the king on't, what would I do?

SEBASTIAN:
'Scape being drunk for want of wine.

GONZALO:
I' the commonwealth I would by contraries
Execute all things; for no kind of traffic
Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
And use of service, none; contract, succession,
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
No occupation; all men idle, all;
And women too, but innocent and pure;
No sovereignty;--

SEBASTIAN:
Yet he would be king on't.

ANTONIO:
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
beginning.

GONZALO:
All things in common nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavour: treason, felony,
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
Would I not have; but nature should bring forth,
Of its own kind, all foison, all abundance,
To feed my innocent people.

SEBASTIAN:
No marrying 'mong his subjects?

ANTONIO:
None, man; all idle: whores and knaves.

GONZALO:
I would with such perfection govern, sir,
To excel the golden age.

SEBASTIAN:
God save his majesty!

ANTONIO:
Long live Gonzalo!

GONZALO:
And,--do you mark me, sir?

ALONSO:
Prithee, no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.

GONZALO:
I do well believe your highness; and
did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen,
who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that
they always use to laugh at nothing.

ANTONIO:
'Twas you we laughed at.

GONZALO:
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing
to you: so you may continue and laugh at
nothing still.

ANTONIO:
What a blow was there given!

SEBASTIAN:
An it had not fallen flat-long.

GONZALO:
You are gentlemen of brave metal; you would lift
the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue
in it five weeks without changing.

SEBASTIAN:
We would so, and then go a bat-fowling.

ANTONIO:
Nay, good my lord, be not angry.

GONZALO:
No, I warrant you; I will not adventure
my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh
me asleep, for I am very heavy?

ANTONIO:
Go sleep, and hear us.

ALONSO:
What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts: I find
They are inclined to do so.

SEBASTIAN:
Please you, sir,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
It is a comforter.

ANTONIO:
We two, my lord,
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
And watch your safety.

ALONSO:
Thank you. Wondrous heavy.

SEBASTIAN:
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!

ANTONIO:
It is the quality o' the climate.

SEBASTIAN:
Why
Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not
Myself disposed to sleep.

ANTONIO:
Nor I; my spirits are nimble.
They fell together all, as by consent;
They dropp'd, as by a thunder-stroke. What might,
Worthy Sebastian? O, what might?--No more:--
And yet me thinks I see it in thy face,
What thou shouldst be: the occasion speaks thee, and
My strong imagination sees a crown
Dropping upon thy head.

SEBASTIAN:
What, art thou waking?

ANTONIO:
Do you not hear me speak?

SEBASTIAN:
I do; and surely
It is a sleepy language and thou speak'st
Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open; standing, speaking, moving,
And yet so fast asleep.

ANTONIO:
Noble Sebastian,
Thou let'st thy fortune sleep--die, rather; wink'st
Whiles thou art waking.
