6 
Chanting the August Title of the 
Lotus Sutra: Daimoku 
Practices in Classical and 
Medieval Japan 
Jacqueline I. Stone 
THE NEW BUDDHIST movements of the Kamakura period (1185-1333) 
are known for their emphasis on simple, widely accessible practices, 
based upon faith rather than doctrinal understanding or meditative 
insight and held to be particularly suited to the capacity of persons 
living in the degenerate, Final Dharma age (mappo). Often this em- 
phasis on simple practices has been cited to support oversimplified 
descriptions of Kamakura Buddhism as a popular movement react- 
ing against the excessively complex practices and elitism of the older 
Buddhist establishments. Although not wholly inaccurate, such de- 
scriptions need to be more carefully qualified.! The simple practices 
emerged too long before the Kamakura period to be considered ex- 
clusively characteristic of that age, and even during the Kamakura 
period itself, easy accessibility of the Buddhist path to uneducated 
common people represented only one of several reasons why simple 
practices came to be widely advocated. Tracing the evolution of such 
practices thus provides an important key to uncovering the complex- 
ities in the emergence of Kamakura Buddhism and reveals numer- 
ous points of continuity, as well as nee between older and newer 
religious forms. 
Of the simple practices, chanting the nembutsu or name of the 
Buddha Amida (Skt. Amitabha) in the formula “Namu-Amida-butsu” 
has received the widest attention in the West. We have a general idea, 
for example, how this invocational or chanted nembutsu emerged 
alongside and gradually surpassed the visualization meditations and 
other contemplative forms of nembutsu being practiced within the 
Tendai sect during the Heian period (794-1185); how it was chanted 
by persons of every social rank, from court nobles hoping for birth 
116 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title WW? 
in Amida’s Pure Land to common people who were taught to chant 
it by wandering zi; how it was used for memorial prayers and as a 
protection against vengeful ghosts and other evils; and how it was 
eventually elevated to the status of an exclusive practice by Honen 
(1133-1212), who deemed it the sole gate of salvation in the Final 
Dharma age.” Less well understood, however, is the evolution of 
another, structurally similar simple practice—that of chanting the 
daimoku or title of the Lotus Sutra. This essay will explore how the 
practice emerged and developed and what the emergence and 
development of the practice may contribute to our knowledge of 
Kamakura Buddhism. 
Unlike the invocational nembutsu, the chanting of the daimoku 
seems to have had few if any Chinese precedents.’ In Japan, as is well 
known, chanting the title of the Lotus Sutra in the formula “Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo” was advocated by Nichiren (1222-1282), one of 
the leading figures in the new Kamakura Buddhist movements. Myoho- 
renge-kyo is the Japanese pronunciation of Miao-fa lien-hua ching (Scrip- 
ture of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma, T. 262.9:1-62), 
Kumiarajiva’s superb translation of the Lotus Sutra done in 406 and 
revered as authoritative throughout East Asia. Namu is a translitera- 
tion of the Sanskrit namo- (from namas) and expresses devotion, ven- 
eration, praise, or the taking of refuge—in this case, with respect to 
the Lotus Sutra. Today, the daimoku is chanted almost exclusively by 
adherents of the various denominations of Nichiren Buddhism or by 
members of those new religions that claim some link with Nichiren’s 
teaching.‘ So closely is this practice associated with Nichiren’s name 
that he is often assumed to have initiated it. This assumption may 
have been strengthened by traditional Nichiren hagiography, which 
relates how, on the twenty-eighth day of the fourth lunar month in 
the fifth year of Kencho (1253), on the morning of his first public 
sermon, Nichiren rose before dawn, climbed Mt. Kasagamori in Awa 
province and, facing eastward over the Pacific Ocean toward the ris- 
ing sun, chanted “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo!” for the first time.® Many 
people, both Nichiren Buddhists and others as well, have evidently 
understood this as meaning not only the “first time” Nichiren him- 
self chanted the daimoku but the “first time” it was ever voiced by any- 
one. However, as we shall see, Nichiren himself did not claim to have 
originated the practice of chanting the Lotus Sutras title, and in fact 
insisted that Buddhist masters of the past had chanted it before him. 
Although Nichiren’s specific claims about his predecessors may be 
open to qualification, Japanese scholarship in recent decades has 
established that Nichiren’s practice of chanting the daimoku did in- 
deed have antecedents. Moreover, within the early Nichiren commu- 
nity, this practice was understood variously, and not always in ways 

118 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
that accorded with what is considered orthodox doctrine by the 
major Nichiren denominations today. This essay will explore some 
aspects of the origins and development of the practice of chanting 
the daimoku in medieval Japan. The first part will deal with this prac- 
tice as it existed before Nichiren, assessing the current state of Japa- 
nese scholarship on this subject. The second part will examine the 
question of how the chanting of the daimoku was understood within 
the early Nichiren community. 
The Daimoku outside the Nichiren Context 
In this section, we will consider two types of evidence that shed light 
on daimoku practice outside the context of Nichiren and his commu- 
nity. First we will examine a discussion of the practice of chanting the 
daimoku that occurs in the Shuzenji-ketsu, an apocryphal work in four 
fascicles attributed to the Japanese Tendai founder Saicho (767- 
822). This text, the focus of much modern scholarly controversy, was 
in premodern times widely thought to have been known to Nichiren 
and to have influenced his formulation of the daimoku practice. 
Then we will turn to a consideration of several widely scattered refer- 
ences to the chanting or other uses of the daimoku before Nichiren’s 
time. 
The Shuzenji-ketsu Controversy 
The Shuzenji-ketsu ({Doctrinal] Decisions of Hsiu-ch’an-ssu)® was 
the first text to draw modern scholarly attention to the possibility of 
pre-Nichiren origins for the practice of chanting the Lotus Sutra’s 
title. The Shuzenji-ketsu purports to be a record of various transmis- 
sions received by Saicho during his journey to China, chiefly from 
Tao-sui at the temple Hsiu-cha’n-ssu on Mt. T’ien-t’ai. It belongs to 
the genre known as kuden homon or orally transmitted doctrines, 
texts systematizing medieval Tendai doctrines informed by notions 
of original enlightenment (hongaku). It is thought to represent an 
early stage in the development of the “great matters of the threefold 
seven categories” (sanju shichika no daiji)—the four broad categories 
of transmission and three abbreviated transmissions—that system- 
atize the orally transmitted doctrines of the Eshin school of medieval 
Tendai Buddhism.’ It also presents the most detailed discussion of 
the practice of chanting the daimoku to appear in any known medi- 
eval text outside the corpus of works belonging to the Nichiren tradi- 
tion. Other medieval Tendai texts appear possibly to refer to the 
practice of chanting the Lotus Sutra’s title, but these notices are for 
the most part brief and unclear.’ The Shuzenji-ketsu, in contrast, dis- 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 119 
cusses the daimoku at some length and offers a doctrinal explanation 
for this practice. Like most of the Tendai kuden literature, it is vir- 
tually impossible to date with accuracy; estimates range from the 
mid-eleventh to the beginning of the fourteenth century. Because 
this text for a long time represented the sole unambiguous refer- 
ence to the practice of chanting the daimoku outside of Nichiren Bud- 
dhism, its dating became a focus of considerable controversy between 
scholars of the Tendai and Nichiren sects. At stake were the issues of 
who had initiated this practice and how far Nichiren had been influ- 
enced by the Tendai establishment of his day, with which he had sup- 
posedly broken. Here let us first look at what the Shuzenji-ketsu has to 
say about chanting the daimoku and then summarize the controversy 
surrounding it, considering the implications of proposed datings. 
Several passages in the Shuzenji-ketsu discuss the chanting of the 
daimoku. The first occurs in the context of an extended discussion of 
the threefold contemplation in a single mind (isshin sangan), a cen- 
tral meditation of Tendai Buddhism whereby one contemplates in 
terms of a single thought-moment the unity of the three truths of 
emptiness, provisional existence, and the middle. According to the 
Shuzenji-ketsu, the method of this meditation should be varied in 
accordance with three distinct temporal contexts: special times, ordi- 
nary times, and the hour of death.’ Concerning the last of these, it 
states, 
The practice of this [deathbed] rite does not resemble the form of 
meditation for ordinary times. When one faces his end and the 
pain of dissolution comes upon him suddenly and wracks his body, 
his spiritual faculties are blunted, so that he is unable to discern 
things clearly. What will your learning in ordinary times avail you, 
if in your dying moments you fail to carry out the essential practice 
necessary for liberation? Therefore at this stage, one should prac- 
tice the threefold contemplation in a single mind as encompassed 
in the Dharma container (hogu). The “threefold contemplation in 
a single mind as encompassed in the Dharma container” is pre- 
cisely Myoho-renge-kyo. . . . At the time of death, one should chant 
Namu-myoho-renge-ky6. Through the workings of the three powers 
of the Wondrous Dharma [subsequently explained in considerable 
detail as the powers of the Dharma, the Buddha, and faith], one 
shall at once attain enlightened wisdom and will not receive a body 
bound by birth and death.'° 
Here we see that the daimokuis (1) presented as a practice uniquely 
appropriate to one’s final moments; (2) defined as a “meditation 
container,” whose recitation is equal to the threefold contemplation 
in a single mind; and (3) associated with faith. The latter two aspects 

120 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
suggest similarities with the teaching of Nichiren, who regarded the 
chanting of the daimoku as equivalent to meditative discipline and 
grounded it in faith. There is no evidence, however, that Nichiren 
recommended the daimoku as a practice specifically for the time of 
death, in the manner of the Shuzenji-ketsu.'! 
A second relevant passage of the Shuzenji-ketsu similarly presents 
the chanting of the daimoku as a simple form of another traditional 
Tendai meditation, in this case, the contemplation of “the single 
thought-moment comprising three thousand realms” (¢chinen sanzen) 
—standard Tendai terminology for the interpenetration and identi- 
fication of the mind (“single thought-moment”) and all dharmas 
(“three thousand realms”). This meditation, like the threefold con- 
templation in a single mind, is interpreted by the Shuzenji-ketsu in 
terms of the three temporal contexts of special times, ordinary times, 
and the time of death. Here, again, the contemplation of the single 
thought-moment comprising three thousand realms to be practiced 
at the hour of death is identified as “Myoho-renge-kyo.” “At the time 
of death,” the text reads, “one should chant Myoho-renge-kyo with a 
concentrated mind.”!? It also describes a practice in preparation for 
death in which one recites certain brief passages from the Lotus Sutra 
one thousand times, invokes the name of the bodhisattva Kannon 
(Skt. Avalokitesvara) one thousand times while profoundly contem- 
plating the bodhisattva, and also chants the title of the Lotus Sutra 
one thousand times.!° 
A third passage mentions the daimoku in the course of describing 
practice “possessing concrete form” (uso). Like the first passage cited 
above, it presents the chanting of the daimoku as a simplified form of 
the threefold contemplation in a single mind. It also associates the 
daimoku with specific objects of worship (honzon): 
The transmission concerning the Master [Tao-sui]’s profound and 
secret method of practice states, “You should make pictures of 
images representing the ten realms [of beings] and enshrine them 
in ten places. Facing each image, you should, one hundred times, 
bow [with your body], chant Namu-myoho-renge-kyo with your 
mouth, and contemplate with your mind. When you face the 
image of hell, contemplate that its fierce flames are themselves 
precisely emptiness, precisely provisional existence, and precisely 
the middle, and so on for all the images. When you face the image 
of the Buddha, contemplate its essence being precisely the three- 
fold truth. You should carry out this practice for one time period 
in the morning and one time period in the evening.'* The Great 
Teacher [Chih-i] secretly conferred this Dharma essential for the 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 121 
[beings of] dull faculties in the the last age. If one wishes to escape 
from birth and death and attain bodhi, then first he should employ 
this practice.!° 
This passage, too, offers some intriguing parallels to Nichiren’s 
thought. Its reference to the ten images suggests the calligraphic 
mandala devised by Nichiren, on which the names of representatives 
of all ten realms of beings are inscribed as manifestations of the true 
aspect of reality, represented by “Namu-myoho-renge-ky6” written 
down the mandala’s center. It also associates the chanting of the dai- 
moku with the last age, as Nichiren did. 
Today most scholars agree that the Shuzenji-ketsu is not Saicho’s 
work. Like many Tendai texts of the medieval period, it was retro- 
spectively ascribed to a great teacher of the past. But if not Saicho, 
then who did write it, and when? At what period in time were Japa- 
nese Buddhists chanting the title of the Lotus Sutra at the hour of 
their death, as this text prescribes? Does the Shuzenji-ketsu predate 
Nichiren, and if so, did Nichiren read it? Did it influence him in 
formulating his teachings concerning the daimoku and the mandala? 
Or is it a later work, representing a borrowing of Nichiren’s ideas 
back into the Tendai tradition from which he had emerged? Or—yet 
a third possibility—did the Shuzenji-ketsu and Nichiren’s thought 
emerge independently, perhaps drawing on a common source or 
sources? These questions have provoked heated argument and have 
yet to evoke scholarly consensus. 
In premodern times, when the Shuzenji-ketsu was still held to be 
Saicho’s work, many scholars within the Nichiren sect evidently 
assumed that Nichiren had drawn on it in developing his thought. 
They were no doubt confirmed in this opinion by the fact that two 
works in the corpus of writings attributed to Nichiren refer to the 
Shuzenji-ketsu by name.'® The three abbreviated transmissions of the 
Eshin school mentioned in the Shuzenji-ketsu and other medieval Ten- 
dai texts—concerning, respectively, the triple-bodied tathagata of the 
perfect teaching, the causality the Lotus, and the Land of Ever-Quies- 
cent Light—were sometimes identified in premodern Nichiren de- 
nominational scholarship with the Three Great Secret Dharmas that 
Nichiren had set forth as the core of his teaching: the object of wor- 
ship, the daimoku, and the kaidan or ordination platform.!” 
The first to challenge Saicho’s authorship appears to have been 
Shincho (1596-1659), originally a priest of the Nichiren sect who 
converted to Tendai Buddhism and seems to have entertained rather 
acrimonious feelings toward his former affiliation. In his Aindan 
Nichiren gi (Repudiating the Nichiren Doctrine), Shincho denounced 

122 . JACQUELINE I. STONE 
the Shuzenji-ketsu as a forgery and criticized doctrinal interpretations 
put forth by the Nichiren sect that were based upon it.!® 
In contrast to Shincho’s view, other, later Tendai scholars stoutly 
maintained Saicho’s authorship of the Shuzenji-ketsu and argued on 
this basis that Nichiren Buddhism owed its central practice—chant- 
ing the daimoku—to the founder of their own, Tendai sect. “In no 
respect is this a counterfeit writing,” wrote Keiko (1740-1795) of the 
Jimon branch of Tendai. Noting that the Shuzenji-ketsu, like Nichi- 
ren’s writings, advocates the chanting of the daimoku as a practice 
embodying the essence of all sutras, he added, “There is no doubt 
about it, Nichiren’s school represents a branching off of the above- 
mentioned transmission [i.e., the Shuzenji-ketsu].”!° Buddhist scholar 
Maeda Eun (1857-1930), while not personally affiliated with the 
Tendai sect, also upheld Saicho’s authorship of the Shuzenji-ketsu and 
cited Keiko’s earlier observation to underscore what he saw as the 
essentially derivative nature of Nichiren doctrine. “Even the chant- 
ing of the daimoku, the essential point underlying the founding of 
that [Nichiren] sect, had already been demonstrated by Master 
Saicho,”2° he wrote. 
The first scholar to consider the Shuzenji-ketsu in the light of mod- 
ern textual methodology was Shimaji Daito (1875-1927). Recognizing 
it to be apocryphal, Shimaji offered one of the earliest attempts at 
dating this text. In an essay published in 1922,?! he suggested con- 
nections between the Pure Land thought of the Heian period and 
the daimoku practice recommended in the Shuzenji-ketsu. The Shuzenji- 
ketsu, Shimaji pointed out, especially recommended the daimokuas a 
deathbed practice and stressed the importance of faith. In this, he 
said, it resembled the Pure Land thought expressed in the famous 
Ojoyoshu (Essentials of Birth [in the Pure Land]) by the Tendai prelate 
Genshin (942-1017), a work that had played a significant role in the 
popularization of Amidist belief and practice. The Ojaydshu mentions 
the possibility of salvation simply by chanting the nembutsu with faith 
in Amida, and also emphasizes the soteriological significance of chant- 
ing the nembutsu during one’s dying moments. Moreover, as the 
Shuzenji-ketsu does with the meditation on the mind, it distinguishes 
three temporal contexts for nembutsu practice—ordinary times, special 
times, and the time of death.?? 
After comparing the Shuzenji-ketsu with other medieval Tendai 
oral transmission literature, Shimaji placed its composition between 
about 1060 and 1128—that is, between the end of the main Fujiwara 
period (897-1086) and the beginning of the Insei or Cloister gov- 
ernment period (1086-1185).%8 This would definitely place the Shu- 
zenj-ketsu before Nichiren, and Shimaji does not appear to have 
questioned that Nichiren would have been aware of this text. Never- 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 123 
theless, he pointed out what he saw as significant differences in how 
the damoku was conceptualized in the Shuzenji-ketsu and in Nichi- 
ren’s teaching. For example, where the Shuzenji-ketsu presents the 
daimoku within a framework similar to notions of achieving birth in 
the Pure Land, Nichiren interpreted it in terms of attaining Buddha- 
hood in this very body (sokushin jobutsu). The Shuzenji-ketsu advocates 
chanting the daimoku as a practice specifically intended for the hour 
of death, while Nichiren regarded it as the fundamental practice to 
be conducted at all times. Also, where the Shuzenji-ketsu appears to 
regard the daimoku as a lesser, accommodated practice, Nichiren saw 
it as the highest form of practice, embodying the Buddha’s ultimate 
teaching. Shimaji also noted two further distinctions that, in his view, 
should be drawn between Nichiren’s teaching and medieval Tendai 
thought in general, including the Shuzenji-ketsu: (1) medieval Tendai 
represents a mixture of exoteric and esoteric doctrines and medita- 
tive practices, while Nichiren stressed exclusive devotion to the Lotus, 
and (2) where Tendai thought tends to place greater emphasis on 
doctrinal understanding and meditative insight, Nichiren established 
his practice of the daimoku on the basis of faith alone.*4 
In Shimaji’s opinion, an immediate and significant influence on 
Nichiren’s particular interpretation of the daimoku was the exclusive 
invocational nembutsu taught by Honen (1133-1212), founder of the 
Japanese Jodo or Pure Land sect. Though Nichiren criticized Honen’s 
doctrine harshly, the practices of these two teachers showed striking 
similarities, in that both recommended the repeated chanting, based 
upon faith, of a single phrase, held to contain the essence of the 
Buddha’s teaching and to open salvation to all men and women 
equally in the Final Dharma age. Several scholars have commented 
upon the possible influence of Honen on Nichiren’s thought in this 
regard.2> Shimaji argued that Genshin’s Ojoyoshu, which recom- 
mended both meditative and invocational forms of the nembutsu, 
might be likened to the Shuzenji-ketsu, which links the daimoku with 
meditative practices, while Honen’s advocacy of the single-practice 
nembutsu based upon faith alone no doubt stimulated Nichiren in 
developing his own interpretation of the dazmoku. 
Although Shimaji departed from scholars such as Keiko and Maeda 
in recognizing that the Shuzenji-ketsu was not Saicho’s work, he, too, 
judged that it predated Nichiren. Unlike Keiko and Maeda, Shimaji 
did not suggest that Nichiren owed his ideas about the dazmoku solely 
to the Shuzenji-ketsu. Nevertheless, despite the differences he pointed 
out between the Shuzenji-ketsus interpretation of the daimoku and 
Nichiren’s, or between medieval Tendai thought and Nichiren’s 
thought in general, Shimaji on the whole regarded Nichiren’s doc- 
trine as essentially a continuation of the Eshin school of medieval 

124 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
Tendai.2° Thus he concurred at least to some extent with Keiko and 
Maeda in assuming a strong influence from medieval Tendai on 
Nichiren’s thought. 
In the last several decades, certain scholars within the Nichiren 
sect have vehemently opposed such views, at least in part, it appears, 
because the presumption that Nichiren drew upon the Shuzenji-ketsu 
in developing his ideas about the daimoku has seemed to them to 
compromise Nichiren’s originality and underscore his indebtedness 
to the parent, Tendai tradition. Among the first to deny a connec- 
tion between the Shuzenji-ketsu and Nichiren was Asai Yorin (1883— 
1942), professor at the Nichirensht-affiliated Rissho University and 
a pioneer in applying the techniques of modern textual studies to 
the Nichiren canon. Asai insisted that Keiko, Maeda, Shimaji, and all 
others who maintained that Nichiren had been influenced by the 
Shuzenji-ketsu, or by the medieval Tendai oral transmission literature 
in general, were in error. Such scholars had wrongly assumed that 
the essence of Nichiren’s doctrine was expressed by those works in 
the Nichiren corpus reflecting the influence of medieval Tendai orig- 
inal enlightenment thought. However, Asai argued, these works— 
including the two that mention the Shuzenji-ketsu by name—were not 
written by Nichiren at all; rather, they represent the forgeries of later 
disciples who, influenced by their study on Mt. Hiei or at Tendai cen- 
ters in eastern Japan, had incorporated Tendai original enlighten- 
ment thought into their understanding of Nichiren’s teaching.*’ Asai 
claimed that Nichiren had drawn solely on the pure, orthodox T’ien- 
t'ai/Tendai Buddhism of the Chinese T’ien-t’ai founder Chih-i (538- 
597), the sixth T’ien-t’ai patriarch and restorer Chan-jan (711-782), 
and the founder of Japanese Tendai, Saicho, repudiating the medi- 
eval Tendai of his own day with its admixture of esoteric and Amidist 
elements. The Shuzenji-ketsu, Asai said, 
represents a jumbled doctrine that mixes esoteric thought, ideas 
of birth in the Pure Land, meditation, and the daimoku. .. . It would 
be strange if [Nichiren] Shonin, who based himself on a pure doc- 
trine of the Lotus Sutra, would have acknowledged the Shuzenji-ketsu 
—with its mixture of Lotus, esoteric, and Amidist elements—as a 
work embodying the “inner meaning of the Tendai sect.”28 
Asai’s contributions to the critical textual study of the Nichiren 
canon are enormous, but his project of isolating a “pure” Nichiren 
doctrine, untouched by medieval Tendai influences, suggests a sec- 
tarian interestedness in establishing Nichiren’s intellectual indepen- 
dence from the medieval Tendai tradition. 
Asai contented himself with arguing against a connection between 
Nichiren’s thought and that of medieval Tendai underlying the Shu- 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 125 
zenji-ketsu; he did not speculate about when the Shuzenji-ketsu had 
been written. That remained for his disciple Shigyo Kaishu (1907- 
1968), who estimated that the Shuzenji-ketsu had been compiled about 
the middle or late Kamakura period—that is, somewhere between 
the mid thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries. This would place 
it at approximately the time that Nichiren was active, or perhaps 
slightly earlier or later. A date of composition roughly contemporary 
with Nichiren would of course make it less likely that he had read 
and been influenced by the Shuzenji-ketsu than if this text had existed 
since the later Heian period. Shigyo in fact went so far as to assert 
that the new Kamakura Buddhist movements, Nichiren’s included, 
had not developed out of the Tendai original enlightenment thought 
seen in the Shuzenji-ketsu and other oral transmission texts, as Shi- 
maji and other scholars of medieval Japanese Buddhism had claimed; 
rather, mature Tendai original enlightenment thought had devel- 
oped in response to and in competition with the new Kamakura Bud- 
dhist movements.*? This suggestion of Shigyo’s remained in the realm 
of speculation, however, as he offered no concrete evidence to sup- 
port it.%° 
A more convincing argument for assigning the Shuzenji-ketsu a date 
contemporary with or after Nichiren has been offered by the late 
Tamura Yoshiro (1921-1989), a specialist in Kamakura Buddhist 
thought and the history of interpretation of the Lotus Sutra. Like 
Asai and Shigyo, Tamura attempted to draw clear lines of demarca- 
tion between Tendai original enlightenment discourse and the inter- 
pretation of that doctrine in the thought of Nichiren and other new 
Kamakura Buddhist teachers, but he pursued this task in a more his- 
torically grounded and less polemical fashion than these earlier 
scholars. Tamura accepted Shigy6 Kaishu’s proposed date of mid-to- 
late Kamakura for the Shuzenji-ketsu, but, unlike Shigyo, supported it 
with a strong argument. Basing his decision on a detailed compara- 
tive study of a number of medieval Tendai texts, Tamura proposed a 
tentative periodicization of six stages in the development and syste- 
matization of Tendai original enlightenment thought over the years 
from 1100 to 1400, assigning specific texts to different stages. Be- 
cause the Shuzenji-ketsu is one of the earliest known texts to enumer- 
ate all of the threefold seven categories of transmission into which 
the original enlightenment doctrine was eventually systematized by 
the Eshin school, Tamura assigned it to the fourth stage in his peri- 
odicization, or 1250 to 1300, the period during which he believed 
that the system of the threefold seven categories was fully elaborated. 
However, he also noted that, whereas the four broad categories of 
transmission are discussed in detail in the Shuzenji-ketsu, the three 
abbreviated transmissions are merely mentioned by name. He there- 

126 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
fore surmised that the Shuzenji-ketsu belongs to an early part of this 
stage.3! The Shuzenji-ketsu, in Tamura’s opinion, could conceivably 
represent an incorporation of Nichiren’s daimoku into a Tendai text, 
though he did not strongly argue the case.*? Among those claiming a 
date for the Shuzenji-ketsu contemporary with or after Nichiren, 
Tamura’s argument remains the best substantiated. 
Other scholars, however, still maintain—with minor qualifications 
of Shimaji Daito’s dating—that this text should be assigned to the 
later Heian. The most intriguing suggestion in this regard has been 
advanced by Buddhist historian Takagi Yutaka (1928— ),°° who adopts 
for the sake of discussion the premise that the Shuzenji-ketsu dates 
from around the Cloister government period. Takagi points out that 
the use of the daimoku as a deathbed practice, recommended in the 
Shuzenji-ketsu, resonates with the tremendous concern for dying in a 
ritually correct manner that strongly engaged Japanese Buddhists of 
the later Heian. From about the tenth century on, Buddhist belief 
that one’s dying thoughts exercise a determinative effect on one’s 
fate after death gave rise to specific deathbed practices, aimed at 
enabling one to face death with a calm and properly focused mind, 
thus escaping the round of transmigration and achieving birth in 
the Pure Land. Such practices are described in the many Oj6 den or 
“accounts of those born in the Pure Land” that were compiled dur- 
ing this period. After examining the accounts in eight collections of 
such tales compiled between 951 and 1153, Takagi determined that 
the chief of these deathbed practices was the invocational nembutsu, 
which evidently gained considerable impetus from its use in the 
deathbed setting. A less widespread form of deathbed practice 
attested to in the Ojo den was reciting the Lotus Sutra or individual 
chapters, verses, or phrases from the sutra. Those performing these 
Lotus-related deathbed practices appear to have usually been jikydsha 
—literally, “one who holds the sutra’—devotees of the Lotus, often 
monks and hiirt but also including lay persons, who relied on the 
Lotus Sutra and recited it as their personal practice. Takagi’s research 
did not unearth any accounts of individuals who chanted the dai- 
moku of the Lotus Sutra in their dying moments as the Shuzenji-ketsu 
recommends. Nevertheless, several Ojo den describe the chanting of 
short verse sections or even briefer passages from the sutra, a prac- 
tice that Takagi sees as a possible precursor to use of the daimoku in 
this setting. 
As a deathbed practice, Takagi notes, the nembutsu would have 
had major advantages over Lotus Sutra recitation. First, it would have 
been widely accessible, especially to those unable to read the sutra or 
to acquire a copy of it. This accessibility has always been a point that 
recommended the invocational nembutsu among the common people, 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 127 
for practice at ordinary times as well as at the hour of death. Second, 
whether the dying individual chanted many nembutsu or few, it could 
still be said of that person that he or she died chanting the Buddha’s 
name, an exemplary manner of death. Sutra recitation, however, 
would have carried the risk that one might die in mid-sentence or 
mid-chapter, a death that one imagines might well have been consid- 
ered unaesthetic or even inauspicious. Such a possibility would have 
rendered this practice less suitable than the nembutsu for deathbed 
use. The daimoku, however, would not have had this drawback. Takagi 
suggests that the chanting of the daimoku as a deathbed practice may 
have emerged as a response on the part of Lotus devotees to the use 
of the chanted nembutsu in the deathbed setting. The Shuzenji-ketsu 
would then represent a doctrinally systematized explanation of a 
practice that certain individuals were in fact already carrying out. 
Takagi upholds Shimaji’s conclusion that the Shuzenji-ketsu was stimu- 
lated by the strand of Pure Land thought represented in the Ojo- 
yoshu, which also divides practice into three temporal contexts and 
stresses the importance of specific deathbed observances. Both of 
these texts and the ideas they represent, he suggests, emerged from 
the same intellectual environment. 
One important question that Takagi briefly touches upon but 
does not discuss in detail is why people would have felt a need for 
deathbed practices specifically related to the Lotus Sutra, such as the 
Shuzenji-ketsu describes, rather than simply chanting the nembutsu. As 
many scholars have pointed out, the Buddhism of the Heian period 
united faith in the Lotus Sutra with aspirations for Amida’s Pure 
Land, Lotus and Amidist elements being seen as perfectly harmoni- 
ous and complementary. Monks at the great Tendai center on Mt. 
Hiei and other practitioners as well often conducted Lotus repen- 
tance rituals or other Lotus-related practices in the morning and 
Amidist observances at night—a custom that in later times came to 
be called “daimoku in the morning, nembutsu in the evening,” al- 
though at the time of which we speak, the Lotus practices in question 
do not appear to have entailed chanting the daimoku itself.** Even 
the Lotus-based deathbed rites that Takagi describes were conducted 
with the aim of achieving birth in Amida’s Pure Land, so it would 
seem as though the nembutsu should have sufficed for deathbed pur- 
poses. It has been widely observed that Buddhist practice of the Heian 
period, which generally combined devotion to Amida with Lotus 
Sutra-related observances (“one Buddha, one sutra,” as historian 
Kawazoe Sh6ji terms it), was first broken by Honen’s teaching of 
exclusive reliance on the nembutsu.?> However, we should also note 
that even earlier, there were at least some individuals who, though 
they may not have made exclusive claims, nevertheless relied solely 

128 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
on the Lotus Sutra, even in the hour of death. Ienaga Saburo has in 
fact suggested that the posture of those among the jikyosha who 
recited the Lotus as their only religious discipline may have contrib- 
uted to Nichiren’s advocacy of the daimoku as an exclusive practice.*° 
Takagi’s hypothesis about the Shuzenji-ketsw’s connection to Heian- 
period deathbed practices has yet to be confirmed, as he has found 
no independent evidence of anyone at that time chanting the dai- 
moku in their last hours.37 Nevertheless, especially when considered 
together with the similarities that Shimaji Daito pointed out between 
the Shuzenji-ketsu and the Ojoyoshu, it remains a plausible argument 
for dating the Shuzenji-ketsu before the Kamakura period. 
Another recent contribution to the debate over the Shuzenji-ketsu 
has come from Hanano Michiaki, who, endorsing Takagi’s views, 
holds that the Shuzenji-ketsu dates from around the latter part of the 
Cloister government period and influenced Nichiren’s thought.* It 
is most unlikely, in Hanano’s view, that the Shuzenji-ketsu represents 
either a reverse influence from the Nichiren sect on the Tendai tra- 
dition from which it had emerged or an apocryphon produced by 
Nichiren’s later disciples. He argues that the monks of Mt. Hiei— 
rooted as they were in the aristocracy and valuing the direct trans- 
mission of teachings from master to disciple—would scarcely have 
been open to influences from the Nichiren sect, which had its social 
and economic base among a considerably lower class of people. 
Hanano also points out that Nichiren’s later followers on the whole 
maintained his stance of exclusive devotion to the Lotus Sutra. It is 
unlikely, he argues—and his point here is well taken—that they 
would have forged something as eclectic as the Shuzenji-ketsu, which 
combines devotion to the Lotus with Amidist and esoteric elements.°? 
In Hanano’s estimation, the Shuzenji-ketsu is almost certainly the work 
of Tendai monks. 
Another contributor to the debate is Takahashi Ken’yu, who points 
out discrepancies between the Shuzenji-ketsu and authenticated works 
of Saicho with regard to the chronology of Saicho’s studies in China.‘ 
Takahashi argues that Nichiren—who, judging from his extant writ- 
ings, revered Saicho and was familiar with the facts of his biography 
—would therefore have immediately recognized the Shuzenji-ketsu as 
a forgery and rejected it out of hand. However, misdating of the 
events of Saicho’s journey to China is very common in medieval Ten- 
dai kuden texts and may have been done deliberately by the com- 
pilers to convey some tacit meaning—perhaps to distinguish these 
later documents from authentic writings of Saichd.4! Nichiren did 
indeed have a keen eye for textual problems and would probably 
have noticed the discrepancy in dates, but we cannot be certain what 
it would have signified to him or assume that he would have rejected 
the Shuzenji-ketsu solely on this account. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 129 
The above discussion by no means exhausts the opinions that 
have been put forward concerning the date of the Shuzenji-ketsu,* 
but it will have served to establish the outlines of the debate. In sum, 
the major arguments are (1) that the Shuzenji-ketsu predates Nichi- 
ren and to a greater or lesser extent contributed to the formation of 
his teaching about the daimoku; or (2) that the Shuzenji-ketsu was com- 
posed during or after Nichiren’s time, either by Tendai monks who 
appropriated the Nichiren Buddhist daimoku practice or by later dis- 
ciples of Nichiren. It is also possible that the Shuzenji-ketsu and Nichi- 
ren’s daimoku practice emerged independently, connected only 
through some earlier, common source(s). In this case, one could 
imagine that the Shuzenji-ketsu either predates Nichiren or is roughly 
contemporary with him but that he was unaware of it, or that it was 
composed about the same time as Nichiren or later but did not draw 
on his teaching. In any event, two major issues emerge here: the 
chronology of the Shuzenji-ketsu (as well as the problem of its author- 
ship), and its influence, if any, on Nichiren’s daimoku. 
As we have seen, the Shuzenji-ketsu cannot as yet be dated with cer- 
tainty. Sound arguments have been advanced for placing it in either 
the late Heian or the mid-Kamakura period. It may be that further 
studies of medieval Tendai documents will shed light on this issue. 
For it does seem, on balance, that the Shuzenji-ketsu is far more likely 
to be a Tendai text than a Nichirenist apocryphon. Apart from its 
references to the daimoku, its content is much closer to medieval 
Tendai thought than to Nichiren doctrine, and, as Hanano Michiaki 
has argued, if Nichiren’s later disciples had wished to produce a doc- 
ument legitimizing their daimoku practice by linking it with Saicho, 
they would probably have written something more reflective of Nichi- 
ren’s emphasis on exclusive devotion to the Lotus Sutra than the 
Shuzenji-ketsu.* It is conceivable, perhaps, that the Shuzenji-ketsu may 
represent an incorporation of Nichiren’s daimoku into the medieval 
Tendai tradition. Both in Nichiren’s lifetime and after his death, 
many of his disciples, some of whom had originally been Tendai 
monks, studied at or retained ties with Tendai institutions. However, 
although we have evidence that such connections resulted in the 
introduction of medieval Tendai doctrines into Nichiren thought, 
scholarship has thus far uncovered little indication of reverse appro- 
priation, from Nichiren doctrine into Tendai. And, as we shall see 
from the next section, the author(s) of the Shuzenji-ketsu could have 
derived the daimoku from sources other than Nichiren’s followers. 
Thus, although the “reverse influence” theory of the Shuzenji-ketsus 
references to the daimoku is not impossible, it awaits the support of 
concrete evidence. 
In short, the date and authorship of this important text remain a 
mystery. So does the question of its influence, if any, upon Nichiren. 

130 | JACQUELINE I. STONE 
One should note, however, that even if the Shuzenji-ketsu should pre- 
date him, that does not necessarily mean that he read it. If the two 
writings in the corpus of Nichiren’s work that refer to the Shuzenji- 
ketsu by name should be apocryphal, then we have no concrete evi- 
dence connecting Nichiren with this text. Even if these writings are 
in fact genuine, it is worth noting that they are dated 1280, two years 
before Nichiren’s death and long after he had established his daz- 
moku practice. Significantly, perhaps, the Shuzenji-ketsu is not men- 
tioned in any of his extant early works of the 1250s and 1260s, when 
he first began advocating the chanting of the daimoku. For example, 
in a personal letter dated 1264, he urges a lay follower to “simply 
chant Namu-myoho-renge-kyo, as Bodhisattva Tenjin [Vasubandhu] 
and the Great Teacher T’ien-t’ai [Chih-i] did.”44 This was at a period 
in his life when Nichiren still very much considered himself a fol- 
lower of Saicho. Had he been familiar with the Shuzenji-ketsu at this 
time, it seems likely that he would have mentioned Saicho here as 
well. 
There is room, then, to question the traditional view that the 
Shuzenji-ketsu itself directly influenced Nichiren in his thinking about 
the daimoku. Nevertheless, Nichiren began his religious career as a 
Tendai monk, and it is possible that, in his early studies as a young 
man on Mt. Hiei or through his later association with other Tendai 
clerics, he might have heard of the ideas and practices described in 
the Shuzenji-ketsu and incorporated them into his thinking. As we 
shall see below, recent scholarship has uncovered abundant evidence 
for the use of the daimoku—though not its exclusive use—before 
Nichiren’s time. Thus the question of his familiarity with preexisting 
daimoku practices no longer hinges solely on the date of the Shuzenji- 
ketsu, a fact that has somewhat blunted the polemical edge of the 
long controversy over this text. 
The Daimoku before Nichiren 
The formidable difficulties in dating the Shuzenji-ketsu and other 
medieval Tendai texts—including those that seem to hint at daimoku 
practices—mean that these documents cannot tell us with certainty 
when the practice of chanting the Lotus Sutra’ title emerged. They 
can only suggest that it may have been conducted independently of 
the Nichiren tradition. In recent decades, however, scholarship based 
on other kinds of documents has shed some light on this issue, dem- 
onstrating that the daimoku was indeed being chanted before the 
Kamakura period, though at that time it was neither uniform nor 
widespread. 
One of the first to note early references to chanting the daimoku 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 131 
was Ienaga Saburo (1913-— ), who in 1947 published evidence of this 
practice that he had found in Ojo den and sermon collections dating 
from the mid-Heian period.* Ienaga discovered the following three 
examples. First, the Shui ojo den (compiled early twelfth century) 
devotes a section to one Tachibana no Morisuke (d. 1096), who “every 
evening faced the West and, placing his palms together in reverence, 
chanted the name of [A]mida and recited the title of the Lotus 
Sutra.”*® Two other examples come from the early Cloister govern- 
ment period, in the form of tales or setsuwa related in the Hokke hya- 
kuza kikigakisho, a partial record of three hundred-day series of lec- 
tures on the Lotus Sutra held in 1110 in accordance with the vow of a 
daughter of the retired emperor Go-Sanjo. The record of the lecture 
given on the fourth day of the third month relates the story of a slow- 
witted novice monk in Sui-dynasty China who, being unable to read 
the Lotus Sutra, was taught to recite only the title. “From the moment 
the beli struck at dawn until nightfall, he chanted only ‘Namu-ichijo- 
myoho-renge-kyo [Namu to the one vehicle, the Sutra of the Lotus 
Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma].’ ” In his shame at being unable 
to read the sutra, he threw himself from a high crag. Thereupon he 
fell into hell, where horse- and ox-headed demons thrust him into a 
kettle. Hearing their iron staves strike the kettle, he mistook the 
sound for the temple bell. “ ‘I am being negligent,’ he thought, and, 
raising his voice, chanted ‘Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.’ ” At once the 
kettle broke, the boiling water in the kettle was transformed into a 
clear, cool lake, and he and everyone were seated on lotus blossoms. 
After having questioned the monk and heard his story, Yama, the 
king of hell, “rejoiced greatly and prostrated himself in reverence, 
saying, ‘Go back and chant the title of the Lotus Sutra all the more,’ ” 
and the monk was restored to life.* 
The record of the lecture given on the twenty-sixth day of the 
Sixth Month also relates how chanting the daimoku effected a mirac- 
ulous escape from hell. This story concerns one Sun-chu, a native of 
Wen-chou, of whom we are told that “there was no evil he didn’t 
commit.” Sun-chii made fun of a mendicant monk who was devoted 
to the Lotus by screwing up his mouth and chanting “Myoho-renge- 
kyo” in mocking imitation of the monk. But when Sun-chu died and 
fell into hell, King Yama declared that, although Sun-chu had ap- 
peared to be an extremely evil man, he had in fact performed an 
immense good deed. “ ‘Never yet has a person who chanted “Myoho- 
renge-kyO” a single time, whether in mockery or in earnestness, ever 
fallen into hell,’ King Yama said. ‘Go back to the saha [world] and 
embrace the Lotus Sutra with greater devotion.’ ”* 
In these examples, the chanting of the daimoku has not yet 
emerged as an independent practice in its own right and is seen as 

132 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
inferior to reciting the sutra itself. Nevertheless, these tales reflect a 
belief that the potency of the Lotus Sutra was such that even invoking 
its name was sufficient to redeem human ignorance and evil. 
lenaga gives further examples suggesting that by the latter Heian 
period, people had come to regard the sutra as an object of devotion 
whose beneficient power could be invoked in much the same way as 
that of a buddha or bodhisattva. The Liga Monogatari records that 
when his son Yorimichi lay critically ill, troubled by possessing spirits, 
the powerful courtier Fujiwara no Michinaga (966-1027) cried, “May 
the Lotus Sutra that I have served these many years help me!” The 
Konjaku Monogatari tells of a jikyosha who, when assaulted by robbers 
on the way back from a pilgrimage to Mt. Mitake, called out three 
times, “Lotus Sutra, save me!”59 The same collection also contains the 
tale of a former wet nurse who out of compassion took charge of an 
infant whose mother could not feed it. Placing her withered breast 
into the baby’s mouth, she prayed earnestly throughout the night, 
“May the Lotus Sutra that I have read these many years help me!” 
whereupon her breasts at once filled with milk.5! One can easily 
imagine how those looking to the Lotus Sutra as a source of help and 
protection would have found in the daimoku a convenient form by 
which to invoke its aid. 
The most detailed research to date on the origins of the daimoku 
has been done by Takagi Yutaka, mentioned above in connec- 
tion with his suggestions regarding the Shuzenji-ketsu. Takagi’s work 
on the origins of the daimoku in the Heian period is so vital to 
understanding the history of this practice that we shall devote the re- 
mainder of this section to summarizing it.®? Building upon Ienaga’s 
findings, Takagi has demonstrated that the words “Namu-myoho- 
renge-kyo” or similar expressions of devotion to the Lotus Sutra first 
appeared in formulaic expressions of devotion to the three treasures 
of Buddhisin, specifically, of devotion to the dharma. An extremely 
early example found by Takagi appears in connection with memorial 
services sponsored in 881 by Sugawara no Michizane for his de- 
ceased parents, which included the dedication of a new Kannon 
image, offerings to monks, and lectures on the Lotus Sutra. Michi- 
zane’s written prayer (ganmon) composed on the occasion of these 
events concludes with a conventional expression of desire for his 
parents’ enlightenment and for the transfer of merit to all living 
beings. This wish is introduced with the words “Namu-Kanzeon- 
bosatsu, Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.”®? This is the oldest authenticatible 
occurrence of the phrase “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo” to be discovered 
in Japanese sources thus far.54 
Shimaji Daito had already pointed out that use of the title of the 
Lotus Sutra in expressions of devotion to the three treasures occurs 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 133 
in certain works attributed to Genshin, author of the above- 
mentioned Ojoyoshu, and his disciples Kakuun (953-1007) and 
Kakucho (952/960-1034) .55 Shimaji mentioned specifically the Kukan 
(Contemplation of Emptiness), a brief text attributed to Genshin, 
which concludes with the statement that one who “abhors the 
impure saha world and aspires to the Pure Land of Utmost Bliss 
should chant “Namu-Amida-butsu, Namu-myoho-renge-kyo, Namu- 
Kanzeon-bosatsu.”°® This is clearly an expression of devotion to the 
three treasures, in which “Amida” represents the treasure of the 
buddha; “Myoho-renge-kyo,” the treasure of the dharma; and “Kan- 
zeon,” the treasure of the sangha. In this case, we also find it explic- 
itly stated that the daimoku is to be chanted aloud. Takagi points out 
similar occurrences of the daimoku being used to express devotion to 
the three treasures in works attributed to Kakuun.°” 
As we have seen in the case of the Shuzenji-ketsu, the medieval Ten- 
dai corpus includes many apocryphal works retrospectively attrib- 
uted to eminent scholar-monks, and it is difficult to be certain 
whether the above-mentioned texts are indeed the work of Genshin 
and Kakuun. However, Takagi notes that a reference to the daimoku 
also occurs in a recently discovered document that is verifiably the 
work of Genshin’s disciple Kakucho, the Shuzen koshiki (colophon 
dated 989). This is a liturgical writing for a ceremony Kakucho con- 
ducted in 989 and 991 for a “believers’ association for cultivating 
good” (shuzenko), which he had founded in his district as an opportu- 
nity for those participating to perform good and create merit for 
themselves, their deceased relatives, and all living beings. This text 
specifies what phrases were chanted in expression of devotion to the 
three treasures: as an expression of devotion to the dharma, the 
words “Namu-ichijo-myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the one vehicle, the 
Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma) were chanted.** 
Tagaki suggests that if the above-mentioned Kukan and the works 
attributed to Kakuun are genuine, then, together with this indisput- 
ably authentic work of Kakucho, they would constitute evidence that, 
in the late tenth and early eleventh centuries, Genshin and his disci- 
ples were intoning the daimoku on Mt. Hiei as an expression of devo- 
tion to the treasure of the dharma. 
By turning from written documents to another sort of “text,” Takagi 
has been able to document a further possible connection between 
Genshin’s lineage and the daimoku. He points out that in the year 
1007, Fujiwara no Michinaga caused to be placed in a mound on Mt. 
Kimpu in Yoshino a copy of the Lotus Sutra and other sutras that he 
had inscribed. This is the earliest fully verifiable instance in Japan of 
sutra burial, a practice associated with belief in the Final Dharma age 
and aimed at preserving the teachings throughout the degenerate 

134 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
era until the advent of Maitreya, the future Buddha. Takagi notes 
that the outer surface of the side of the lid of the cylindrical bronze 
case containing the scrolls of Michinaga’s Lotus Sutra was inscribed 
with twelve Sanskrit letters giving the Sanskrit equivalent of Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo® and that the monk who officiated as lecturer 
(koji) at the ceremony where the sutras were offered for burial was 
none other than Kakuun.® He suggests that if the daimoku were 
indeed known among Genshin’s disciples on Mt. Hiei, it might have 
reached Michinaga via Kakuun. 
In looking beyond written texts, Takagi has found additional evi- 
dence for the early use of the daimoku. He notes, for example, a 
thousand-armed Kannon image, erected in 1012 at the Koryuji in 
Kyoto for the benefit of the donor’s deceased parents, that bears in 
two places, along with the inscription “Namu-amida-butsu,” the in- 
scription “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.”°! Based on the names inscribed 
on the statue, Takagi judges that the donor was not necessarily a 
person of high rank. 
Takagi finds that up through the twelfth century, single-phrase ex- 
pressions of devotion to the Lotus Sutra had not yet crystallized as 
“Namu-myoho-renge-kyo;” instead, several different phrases were em- 
ployed. His examples include the following. A prayer inscribed by 
Sugawara no Sadayoshi in 1060 contains the phrase “Namu-Hoke- 
kyo-o” (Namu to the Lotus, king of sutras) .°* A stone monument about 
123 centimeters high, inscribed in 1064 and marking the remains of 
Josuiji Temple in Toyono in Shimo-mashiki district, Kumamoto Pre- 
fecture, is inscribed “Namu-nyoho-myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the 
Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma, [inscribed] in 
accordance with procedure).®? Fujiwara no Munetada records in his 
diary Chuyuk:, in his entry for the twenty-second day of the ninth 
intercalary month of 1118, a ceremony at which the Empress Dowager 
Fujiwara no Hiroko made offerings at the Amida Hall at Uji. Accord- 
ing to his description, at four distinct points in the ceremony, the 
monks made obeisances and intoned expressions of devotion to the 
Lotus Sutra. These expressions were “Namu-gokuraku-nan-chigt- 
myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the 
Wondrous Dharma, the utmost bliss, which is difficult to encounter), 
“Namu-kugyo-kuyo-ichijo-myoden” (Namu with reverence and offer- 
ings to the wondrous scripture of the one vehicle), “Namu-byodo- 
daie-myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the impartial great wisdom, the 
Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma), and “Namu- 
shojo-sese-chigu-myoho” (Namu to the Wondrous Dharma, to be 
encountered throughout lifetime after lifetime and age after age). 
Takagi also notes the existence of the “title chanters” (daimyésd), 
the monks who intoned the title of the sutra at public lectures on the 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 135 
Lotus Sutra or at other Buddhist ceremonies. The exact form in which 
the title was intoned is not known; perhaps, Takagi suggests, it was in 
the manner of the above-mentioned ceremony described in the Chi- 
yuki. In any event, he points out that people would have heard the 
title chanted on such occasions, a fact that might well have helped 
facilitate the spread of the daimoku as an expression of devotion to 
the Lotus. An additional piece of evidence, not noted by Takagi, is 
that one of Nichiren’s letters also contains a reference to the lec- 
turer on the Lotus Sutra chanting its title at the time of the lecture.® 
By the late twelfth century Takagi finds evidence of the daimoku 
being chanted repeatedly, in units of many thousands, in the same 
manner that the nembutsu was recited. In 1183, in accordance with a 
long-standing vow, the artist Unkei (d. 1223) had two copies of the 
Lotus Sutra transcribed with the support of a female sponsor known 
as Akomaro and two monk-calligraphers. Appended to Unkei’s colo- 
phon is a list of rathai kechiensha, those who performed ritual obei- 
sance (raihai) during the copying to gain merit and form a bond 
(kechien) with the dharma. This list includes several monks from 
Unkei’s school as well as other men and women. According to the 
colophon, Unkei calculated the number of lines copied daily and, 
for each line copied, had the male and female kechiensha bow three 
times and “chant together the august title and also the nembutsu.” 
The “august title” here evidently refers to the daimoku, for the list of 
kechiensha is followed by the statement “During the copying, the above 
persons bowed fifty thousand times and [chanted] the nembutsu one 
hundred thousand times, and the august title of the Lotus Sutra, one 
hundred thousand times.” The colophon also mentions the number 
of individual recitations performed by local people who supported 
the project: among these individuals, two lay persons chanted the 
august title and the nembutsu each three thousand one hundred times, 
and one monk, Sokei, chanted the august title of the Lotus one hun- 
dred thousand times. Takagi suggests that an emphasis beginning 
about the time of the Cloister government period on the quantity of 
nembutsu chanted is here reflected in the chanting of the dazmoku. 
Other references to chanting the daimoku that Takagi cites from 
about the same period occur in sefsuwa. One such example appears 
in a tale from the Hobutsu shu (A Collection of Treasures, compiled 
about 1177-1180). King Evil Poison, so called because of his hostility 
toward Buddhism, was inordinately fond of cattle. Wishing to save 
him from his evil, the Buddha summoned his disciples Kasyapa, Sari- 
putra, and Maudgalyayana and transformed them, respectively, into 
a cow, its owner, and a cowherd. He named the cow Myoho, the 
owner Renge, and the cowherd Kyo. The three presented themselves 
to the king, who was delighted. When he called for them, he would 

136 , JACQUELINE I. STONE 
say, “Myoho, Renge, Kyo.” After the king died and fell into hell, he 
was able to escape punishment because he had, although inadvert- 
ently, pronounced the title of the Lotus Sutra.67 Another example 
appears in the Hosshin shu (A Collection of Religious Awakenings, 
compiled about 1214-1215), a collection of setsuwa attributed to 
Kamo no Chomei (1155-1216). This story concerns a wise man who 
had a number of children. As soon as his children became capable 
of speech, he taught them to chant the title of the Lotus Sutra. As 
they grew older, he taught them more of the sutra, phrase by phrase, 
until they could repeat an entire chapter or roll. When asked why he 
did so, he explained that, should the children die young, they would 
nevertheless have formed a bond with the Lotus Sutra, the Buddha’s 
ultimate teaching; thus the opportunity provided by their having been 
born into a human existence would not have been wasted.® 
In sum, there is abundant evidence for the chanting of the davz- 
moku well before Nichiren’s time; indeed, the phrase “Namu-myoho- 
renge-kyo” is attested to as early as the late ninth century. As an ex- 
pression of devotion to the three treasures, the daimoku served to 
express veneration of the dharma, and in this form was included in 
written prayers, intoned at ceremonies, and inscribed on statues and 
monuments and the bronze cases of sutras intended for burial. It 
served as a simple phrase by which to invoke the power and protec- 
tion of the Lotus Sutra, and, although by no means as widespread as 
the nembutsu, seems to have been chanted in similar fashion by at 
least the end of the twelfth century. Moreover—if the Shuzenji-ketsu is 
a Heian-period text—it would seem that the daimoku was also used as 
a simplified form of meditation and as a deathbed practice. 
It is noteworthy, however, that the chanted daimoku of this period 
does not yet seem to have gained much momentum as a popular 
practice. The setsuwa, cited above, of the dull-witted novice who 
escaped from hell by chanting the daimoku and of the wise man who 
taught the daimoku to his young children show an awareness that this 
practice was suitable to people of limited learning. However, the 
point of these stories seems to be not the suitability of the chanting 
of the daimoku as a practice for uneducated persons, but the immen- 
sity of the Lotus Sutra’s salvific power, so great that even uttering its 
title would enable one to form a bond with the dharma and escape 
the pains of hell. Such tales would also have resonated with wide- 
spread belief that all people living in the Final Dharma age were of 
limited capacity. Commoners may have had the opportunity to hear 
the daimoku chanted at lectures and ceremonies, such as that con- 
ducted by Kakucho; the inscriptions on the thousand-armed Kannon 
noted by Takagi also suggest that it may have been known among 
people outside the aristocracy. Nevertheless, the presently available 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 137 
evidence from the Heian period in several cases connects the dai- 
moku with monks, members of the nobility, and other ranking 
persons. The daimoku may well have emerged in monastic and aristo- 
cratic circles, rather than as a direct response to the needs of the 
common people, as has often been suggested. 
As in the case of the Shuzenji-ketsujj, the question arises whether or 
not Nichiren knew of and drew upon this earlier, Heian-period 
daimoku tradition. lenaga Saburo thought not, though he acknowl- 
edged Nichiren’s conviction that the expression “Namu-myoh6-renge- 
kyo” had been used by teachers of the past. Nichiren, he noted, had 
himself written, “In our country, for seven hundred years and more 
[i.e., since the introduction of Buddhism],...there has been no 
one who chanted or encouraged others to chant Namu-myoho- 
renge-kyo in the same manner that the name of Amida is chanted. 
... [I] Nichiren alone first chanted it in the country of Japan.”®? On 
this basis, lenaga surmised that Nichiren’s daimoku had not devel- 
oped out of antecedent daimoku practices but was “re-invented” on 
the pattern of the chanted nembutsu.” 
Takagi Yutaka, however, in continuing the research Ienaga had ini- 
tiated and making additional findings, has reached a very different 
conclusion. He suggests that three major elements contributed to 
the development of Nichiren’s daimoku practice: (1) earlier daimoku 
practices of the Heian period, (2) daimoku in medieval Tendai doc- 
trine, as represented by the Shuzenji-ketsu, which Nichiren would have 
encountered during his studies on Mt. Hiei, and (3), as Ilenaga had 
suggested, Honen’s nembutsu. It was out of these three, Takagi argues, 
that Nichiren forged his unique conception of the daimoku, divorced 
from the Amidist elements often associated with it during the Heian 
period, and established it as an exclusive practice and the core of a 
new interpretation of Buddhism.” 
The evidence from Nichiren’s own writings on this issue is not 
clear-cut. It is true that Nichiren’s references to specific persons chant- 
ing the daimoku before him are generally not to contemporaries or 
even to Japanese predecessors, but to Buddhist masters of India and 
China.”2 The statement Ienaga quotes, that “Nichiren alone first 
chanted” the daimoku, would indeed seem to suggest that Nichiren 
knew of no one else in his own time chanting “Namu-myoho-renge- 
kyo.” Nevertheless, one can juxtapose this with another passage, al- 
ready referred to, in which Nichiren writes that, since the time of the 
Buddha, whether in India, China, or Japan “the dazmoku of the Lotus 
Sutra has never yet been advocated in the same manner as the name 
of Amida. Individuals have merely chanted it themselves, or when 
lecturing on the sutra, the lecturer alone chanted it.””> This would 
seem to reflect some awareness of previous daimoku practices. It also 

138 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
suggests that Nichiren saw the originality of his daimoku, not in the 
fact that he was literally the first to chant it, but in that he was the 
first to propagate it “in the same manner as the name of Amida”’— 
that is, as an exclusive practice with claims to universal validity. In 
addition, Nichiren certainly knew of at least one of the attempts being 
made to express devotion to the Lotus Sutra in a single phrase. In 
1264 he wrote a letter, quoted in the previous section, in response to 
a female disciple who had reported to him that she was chant- 
ing “Namu-ichijo-mydden” (Namu to the wondrous scripture of the 
one vehicle) ten thousand times a day. In it, he advised her that 
“though it amounts to the same thing, you should simply chant Namu- 
myoho-renge-ky6, as Bodhisattva Tenjin and the Great Teacher T’ien- 
tai did.””4 
Thus, although the relevant passages are not sufficiently explicit 
to enable a firm conclusion, Nichiren’s extant writings do convey 
some consciousness of earlier or existing daimoku practices. In addi- 
tion, Takagi’s research has shown that by Nichiren’s time, the daz- 
moku was being used in a variety of ritual contexts, although the usage 
was not widespread. When we consider that Nichiren as a young man 
spent at least twelve years studying at Mt. Hiei, Onjoji, Mt. Koya, Shi- 
tennoji, and other religious centers in and near the imperial capital, 
it seems likely that he would have encountered such practices. 
Though much of it is circumstantial, the evidence in sum suggests 
that Nichiren’s daimoku was not merely something he originated as a 
counter to the chanted nembutsu but had roots in these antecedent 
forms of Lotus devotion. 
The Daimoku of Nichiren and His Community 
With Nichiren, chanting the daimoku becomes the basis of an entire 
Buddhist system. Nichiren drew on traditional works of T’ien-t’ai 
exegesis, such as Chih-i’s Fa-hua hstian-i (Profound Meaning of the 
Lotus Sutra), which interprets the sutra’s title as containing the essence 
of the sutra itself. Namu-myoho-renge-kyo was for Nichiren the heart 
not only of the Lotus, but of all other teachings, and the seed of bud- 
dhahood itself. In his thought, it is both the core of the Buddha’s 
teaching and the uniquely valid form of Buddhist practice. One 
utterance of the daimoku, Nichiren wrote, was equivalent to reciting 
the entire sutra.”> Those who chant the daimoku will never be dragged 
down by evil karma and worldly offenses into the lower realms of 
transmigration but are sure to attain buddhahood in this very body 
or achieve birth in the Pure Land.” In Nichiren’s later writings, chant- 
ing the daimoku is presented not as a beginning step or accommoda- 
tion to those incapable of the greater practice of reciting the sutra, 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 139 
but as the highest form of practice, the ultimate of the Buddha’s 
teaching, which he had embodied in the title of the Lotus Sutra 
specifically for the Final Dharma age when people would need it 
most. The daimoku contains all good precepts and the merit gained 
by observing them.” All the practices undertaken by the Buddha 
over countless kalpas and the enlightenment he consequently 
attained are contained within the sutra’s title and “spontaneously 
transferred” to those who embrace it.78 “To practice only the seven 
characters na-mu-myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo may seem limited,” Nichiren wrote, 
“but because [the daimoku] is the teacher of all buddhas of the three 
time periods, the leader of the bodhisattvas of the ten directions, 
and the guide that enables all sentient beings to attain the Buddha 
Way, it is in fact profound.”79 
The second portion of this essay will focus not on the doctrinal 
foundations of Nichiren’s daimoku—which would require a separate 
study—but on how the practice of chanting daimoku was understood 
early in the history of the Nichiren Buddhist tradition and how it dif- 
fered from, or developed beyond, what we now know of daimoku 
practice in the Heian period. For this information we will turn not 
only to Nichiren’s better-known writings, those that are considered 
normative for Nichiren doctrinal studies, but also to his early writ- 
ings and writings that may be termed problematic, that is, texts 
attributed to Nichiren but whose authenticity has been questioned 
by modern scholars and that may be redactions or even apocryphal 
works produced by his disciples, possibly after his death but well 
before the end of the medieval period.*° By thus examining dazmoku 
practice within the early Nichiren community, we can better under- 
stand the points of both continuity and difference between this 
newly emerging tradition and earlier Buddhist forms of the Heian 
period. 
The Daimoku as Meditative Practice 
Nichiren’s Buddhism, like that of Honen, is often characterized as 
a teaching of faith, as a way of distinguishing it from the parent, Ten- 
dai tradition, characterized as a teaching of meditation. It is true that 
the chanting of the daimoku was for Nichiren, above all, an expres- 
sion of faith—faith, in this case, not in an external savior figure such 
as the Buddha Amida but in the Wondrous Dharma of the Lotus Sutra. 
Especially in his later writings, Nichiren stressed salvation through 
faith rather than through meditative insight, and this position also 
represents orthodoxy for the major Nichiren denominations today. 
Nevertheless, we need to qualify more carefully the distinction be- 
tween faith (represented by Nichiren) and meditation (represented 

140 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
by Tendai) as a way of dividing the “old Buddhism” of the Heian 
period from the “new Buddhism” of the Kamakura period. Devo- 
tional and contemplative aspects of Buddhist practice are not always 
easily or even meaningfully disinguishable, and in addition, there 
are sound historical reasons for questioning whether either Tendai 
or Nichiren Buddhism can be neatly categorized in this way. One 
such reason, which we will focus on here} is evidence that the dai- 
moku was at least occasionally taught as a meditative discipline, or as 
an accompaniment to traditional Tendai meditation, in the early 
Nichiren community. 
Nichiren himself appears to have taken this view during the first 
part of his career. Two of his authenticated early writings recom- 
mend Tendai meditative practice in conjunction with the daimoku 
for those capable of performing it. One, an essay dated 1260, reads, 
One’s constant practice should be chanting the daimoku, Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo. . .. Because ours is an age in which the ignorant 
are many, precedence is not given to the contemplation of the sin- 
gle thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. But those 
with a will to do so should by all means study and contemplate it.*! 
And in a letter to a scholar-monk disciple in 1271, shortly before 
his exile to Sado Island, Nichiren wrote, 
What should always be upon one’s lips is Namu-myoho-renge-kyo. 
What should always reside within one’s heart is the contemplation 
of the single thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. 
This is the practice and understanding of wise persons. As for the 
lay persons of Japan, one should just have them chant Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo exclusively, [for] the name [of the sutra] is in- 
variably accompanied by the virtue of its essence.*? 
However, from the period of the Sado exile (1271-1274), a critical 
turning point in Nichiren’s life and thought, references to the con- 
templation of the three thousand realms in a single thought-moment 
as an adjunct mode of practice virtually disappear from Nichiren’s 
writings. By 1277, he would write that he “did not encourage the way 
of contemplation of the single thought-moment comprising three 
thousand realms but urged only the chanting of the daimoku”® as the 
sole authentic practice for the Final Dharma age. 
Nichiren’s later works in fact present the “three thousand realms 
in a single thoughtmoment” (i.e., the realm of the Buddha’s enlight- 
enment, the perfect interpenetration of the mind and all phenom- 
ena) not as a principle to be discerned or perceived, as in introspec- 
tive meditation, but rather as a reality inherent and manifested in 
the moment of faith and chanting.’ He describes the difference, 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 141 
using the Buddhist language of his day, as one of “abstract principle” 
(ri) versus “concrete manifestation” (jz).8° That is, where traditional 
Tien-t’ai/Tendai meditation aims at perceiving through introspec- 
tive contemplation the “single thought-moment comprising three 
thousand realms” as a formless principle inherent in one’s mind, in 
Nichiren’s teaching this principle is manifested in concrete form as 
the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra. One need not, then, meditate to per- 
ceive this principle within one’s mind; such meditation is in fact 
claimed to be unsuited to the Final Dharma age. Rather, one takes 
faith in its concrete manifestation—the daimoku—and accesses it in 
the act of chanting. It is not clear, however, whether in making this 
distinction Nichiren saw his “daimoku of faith alone” as a radical 
departure from earlier meditative discipline or as a continuation of 
it in an altered, more accessible form. His writings leave room for 
both views, and later interpretations have varied considerably. 
References to the daimoku as a form of meditation also occur in 
other works traditionally attributed to Nichiren but whose authentic- 
ity has recently come under question. Such problematic or possibly 
apocryphal texts would be less useful than fully authenticated ones 
were our concern simply to establish what Nichiren himself taught. 
However, traditions are formed by others besides the founder. It is 
worth our while here to examine such problematic writings because 
some of these texts discuss the daimoku in great detail and because 
our aim is not to present an “official” interpretation of the daimoku 
but to investigate any available sources suggesting how this practice 
was understood by early Nichiren Buddhists. 
First let us look at an essay in the Nichiren collection entitled Issho 
jobutsu sho (On Becoming a Buddha in One Lifetime), which de- 
scribes the daimoku as a method of carrying out the Tendai medita- 
tive practice of “contemplating the mind” (kanjin): 
Now if you wish to put an end to beginningless birth and death 
and, this time round, attain unexcelled bodhi without fail, you must 
contemplate the subtle principle originally inherent in living 
beings. The “subtle principle originally inherent in living beings” 
is Myoho-renge-kyo. Therefore, when one chants Myoho-renge- 
kyo, that is contemplating the subtle principle originally inherent 
in living beings.*® 
It also describes chanting the daimoku as a method of purifying the 
mind of delusion, as in meditation, and revealing the inherent bud- 
dha nature: 
Even right now, the deluded mind in a single thought-moment of 
ignorance is an unpolished mirror. But if one polishes it, it will 

142 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
surely become the bright mirror that is the true suchness of the 
Dharma nature. Profoundly arouse the mind of faith and day and 
night, morning and evening, polish [the mirror of the mind] with- 
out neglect. How should one polish it? Simply chanting Namu- 
myoho-renge-ky6o is what is called “polishing.”*®” 
Here we note that faith is also emphasized. In this text, as with 
others in the Nichiren collection—and for that matter, in the Shuzen- 
ji-ketsu—‘faith” and “meditation” clearly do not represent exclusive 
conceptions of the daimoku. 
This essay has traditionally been assigned the very early date of 
1255, two years after Nichiren’s first public sermon, an event later 
regarded as marking the founding of his sect. Should the Issho jobu- 
tsu sho in fact be Nichiren’s writing, and the date of 1255 correct, it 
would represent the earliest of his surviving works to mention the 
practice of chanting the daimoku. However, Nichiren’s authorship has 
recently been questioned.*® 
Another problematic essay discussing the daimoku in the vocabu- 
lary of traditional Tendai meditation is the Ichinen sanzen homon (The 
Doctrine of the Three Thousand Realms in a Single Thought- 
Moment). This work has traditionally been dated 1258, but again, 
Nichiren’s authorship is in question.°? 
The meditation on the three thousand realms in a single thought- 
moment and the meditation method of the threefold contempla- 
tion in a single mind are both contained within the five characters 
myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo, and the five characters myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo are con- 
tained within our mind. ... Thus, when we chant Myoho-renge-kyo, 
the Buddha of original enlightenment within our mind appears.%° 
Here, as in the Shuzenji-ketsu, the daimoku is described literally as a 
“meditation container.” The Ichinen sanzen homon also discusses in 
considerable detail another simplified form of meditation recom- 
mended in several medieval Tendai texts—that of reciting three times 
a passage from the Lotus Sutra dealing with the “ten suchnesses”®! as 
a means of practicing the threefold contemplation in a single mind. 
The Ichinen sanzen homon further identifies chanting the daimoku 
with meditative practice as follows: 
Ignorant people may think it hard to understand that chanting the 
sutra’s title and contemplation are the same. Nevertheless, [chiian] 
two of T’ien-t’ai [Chih-i]’s [Mo-ho] chih[-kuan] refer to “vocalizing 
or remaining silent.”? “Vocalizing” indicates the sutra. “Remain- 
ing silent” indicates contemplation. Moreover, [chiian] one of the 
Ssu-chiao i [The Meaning of the Four Teachings] states, “Not only 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 143 
is it not a waste of effort, it is the essential by which one can accord 
with the principle.”% 
In the text of Chih-i’s famous meditation manual, the Mo-ho chih- 
kuan (Great Calming and Contemplation), the phrase “vocalizing or 
remaining silent” refers—among practices performed with the body, 
mouth, and mind—to practice with the mouth as it pertains to the 
constantly sitting samadhi, first of the four kinds of samadhi that 
Chih-i’s manual outlines. The Mo-ho chih-kuan explains that, when in 
the course of seated, silent meditation, the practitioner becomes 
tired, ill, or drowsy or is assailed by inner or outer hindrances, he 
may call upon the name of a buddha and so gain aid in clearing away 
the obstructions to his meditation.** Thus in the practice of Chih-i’s 
constantly sitting samadhi, “vocalizing,” or calling on the name of a 
buddha, serves as no more than an aid to the primary task of “re- 
maining silent” or practicing contemplation. Here, however, in the 
Ichinen sanzen homon, “vocalizing” and “keeping silent” are placed on 
an equal level, and the chanting of the daimoku thus equated with 
meditation. 
Part of the discussion of the daimoku in the Ichinen sanzen homon 
occurs in the context of a polemic against “wordless” Zen and its 
denial of the scriptural tradition, particularly against its implicit 
rejection of the Lotus Sutra. In answer to the question “whether, even 
without reading the sutra, one can attain buddhahood simply by con- 
templation of the mind-ground,” this writing insists that vocal prac- 
tice of the sutra—specifically, the chanting of its titte—forms a neces- 
sary complement to silent contemplation. “Persons of wisdom should 
practice contemplation together with reading and recitation [of the 
sutra]. Ignorant persons, though they chant the daimoku alone, will 
be encompassed within this principle.”®* Here we see that for “igno- 
rant persons,” chanting the daimoku replaces meditation, a point to be 
discussed in detail below. 
As we have seen, scholars have questioned the authenticity of the 
Issho jobutsu sho and the Ichinen sanzen homon, and these two texts may 
thus represent the ideas of certain of Nichiren’s followers, rather 
than of Nichiren himself. Nor can we be certain whether they were 
written in Nichiren’s lifetime or at some time after his death. Never- 
theless, we do know that, after Nichiren’s death, not all his followers 
understood the daimoku as a matter of pure devotionalism; some 
continued to interpret it in terms of meditative practice. One such 
was Tenmoku (1245-1337), who had become a disciple during Nichi- 
ren’s lifetime. Tenmoku interpreted the daimoku in light of the two 
kinds of Lotus samadhi of T’ien-t’ai Buddhism, established by Chih-i’s 

144 , JACQUELINE I. STONE 
teacher Hui-ssu (515-577) on the basis of the “Peaceful Practices” 
chapter of the Lotus Sutra—peaceful practices possessing characteris- 
tics and peaceful practices devoid of characteristics.*° 
Practice has two aspects. One is to chant the title [of the Lotus 
Sutra] in any of the four postures—walking, standing, sitting, or 
lying down—even with a distracted mind. This is “practice possess- 
ing characteristics” (usogyo). The “peaceful practices possessing 
characteristics” correspond to this. The other aspect is that, with 
understanding of its meaning, one chants Myoho-renge-kyo with 
one’s mouth and directly contemplates the subtle principle of the 
single thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. This is 
“practice devoid of characteristics” (musogyo). The “peaceful prac- 
tices devoid of characteristics” correspond to this. In other words, 
it does not matter whether one has wisdom or not, whether one is 
noble or base, or of high or low station, whether one breaks the 
precepts or is without precepts. If one carries out the practice of 
contemplating and reciting the five characters of the daimoku, even 
with a distracted mind, he shall directly behold the body of [Bodhi- 
sattva] Fugen [Skt. Samantabhadra]. If one who has wisdom and 
understanding devotes himself to the practice of the subtle con- 
templation of the three thousand realms in conjunction with the 
five characters myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo, he shall at once behold the body of 
Fugen. Even though practice is thus divided into two, both lead to 
the fruit of buddhahood.” 
Tenmoku’s description of the practice “possessing characteristics” 
and the practice “devoid of characteristics” appears to be closely 
modeled on Hui-ssu’s. Moreover, his interpretation of the daimoku as 
a vehicle for the visualization of the bodhisattva Fugen seems far 
closer to T’ien-t’ai meditative practices than to the daimoku of faith 
alone taught by Nichiren in his later years. 
Another medieval Nichiren monk who should be mentioned in 
this context is Mobara Nikkai (1341-1396), who interpreted Nichi- 
ren Buddhist daimoku practice in terms of the categories of Tendai 
meditation such as the “ten modes of contemplation” (jujo kampo).% 
Though they have generally remained a minor voice, contemplative 
interpretations of the daimoku have coexisted in the Nichiren tradi- 
tion along with more strongly devotional understandings down to 
the modern period.% 
If we take into account the evidence of the Shuzenji-ketsu as well as 
writings by or attributed to Nichiren and his followers, it appears 
that in the late Heian and Kamakura periods, the practice of chant- 
ing the daimoku was emerging as an adjunct or alternative to Lotus- 
centered Tendai meditative disciplines, much in the same way that 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 145 
nembutsu recitation based upon faith alone had emerged alongside, 
and eventually superceded, the various contemplative and visualiza- 
tion meditations associated with the Buddha Amida. As such, it must 
be seen as part of a larger historical process. During the Heian period, 
the four kinds of samadhi constituting the T’ien-t’ai meditation sys- 
tem introduced from China by Saicho were gradually supplemented 
and then surpassed in popularity by such tangible acts of devotion as 
reading, reciting, and transcribing the Lotus Sutra, as well as other 
devotional practices including the chanted nembutsu.'° Some of 
these practices had roots in the Tendai meditational framework it- 
self: the chanted nembutsu derived in part from the constantly walk- 
ing samadhi, the second of the four kinds of samadhi, in which one 
both contemplates the Buddha Amida and chants his name, while 
Lotus devotion formed a component of the part-walking, part-sitting 
samadhi, third of the four kinds of samadhi, in which one pays rever- 
ence to and recites the Lotus Sutra along with practicing meditation. 
Another important influence here was esoteric Buddhism, which 
emphasizes practices having vocal and visual ritual form—practice 
with body, mouth, and mind. This shift in emphasis from ri toward 2, 
as Buddhists of the time spoke of it—that is, from introspective con- 
templation to practices emphasizing vocalization and tangible devo- 
tional form—continued both within medieval Tendai and in the new 
Buddhist movements, culminating in the latter with the daimoku and 
the nembutsu presented as exclusive teachings based upon faith alone. 
Looking back over the history of Tendai and Nichiren Buddhism, 
one can say that in general the former has placed greater emphasis 
on meditative discipline and the latter on faith, but the distinction is 
far from absolute. Contemplative and devotional strands have coex- 
isted and overlapped in both traditions, and the shift in emphasis 
from introspective meditation to practices emphasizing faith and 
outward expression transcended sectarian lines. In fact, it character- 
ized much of Japanese Buddhism in the late classical and medieval 
periods. 
The Daimoku as the Practice of “Ignorant Persons” 
As we have seen, some of the Heian-period setsuwa that mention 
chanting the daimoku reflect an awareness that this practice was 
suited to people of limited capacity. In the collection of works attrib- 
uted to Nichiren, discussion of the merits of chanting the daimoku as 
a practice especially suited to “ignorant persons” achieves the status 
of a conscious discourse. But who exactly were these “ignorant per- 
sons”? Different texts in the Nichiren corpus suggest at least four dif- 
ferent ways in which this category may have been understood. 

146 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
First, “ignorance” is explicitly equated with illiteracy. The Sozai 
ichinen sho, a problematic text attributed to Nichiren and tradition- 
ally dated 1258, reads, 
Question: If an ignorant person who cannot read even a single 
word chants “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo,” what benefit is there in 
that? j 
Answer: Even in the case of an illiterate person who cannot rec- 
ognize a single character, if he has faith and chants [the daimoku], 
then among the three karmas of the body, mouth and mind, he 
first forms the merit of actions of the mouth. And if he forms this 
merit, the Buddha’s seed will be planted in his breast, and he will 
surely become a person who is liberated.!?! 
Here, chanting the daimoku is presented as especially advantageous 
to those who cannot read. 
Second, ignorance is equated with lack of capacity for meditative 
discipline. We have already seen this meaning of “ignorance” in pas- 
sages quoted earlier, for example, from the Jchinen sanzen homon: 
“Persons of wisdom should practice contemplation together with 
reading and recitation [of the sutra]. Ignorant persons, though they 
chant the daimoku alone, will be encompassed within this principle.” 
This suggests the advantages of chanting the daimoku to those who 
can neither read the sutra nor practice meditation. A similar under- 
standing of the category “ignorant persons” is seen in the passage, 
also quoted above, from Nichiren’s authenticated essay Sho Hokke 
daimoku sho: 
One’s constant practice should be chanting the daimoku, Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo. . .. Because ours is an age in which the ignorant 
are many, precedence is not given to the contemplation of the sin- 
gle thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. But those 
with a will to do so should by all means study and contemplate it.!°? 
Although the primary distinction here seems to be between those 
who can and those who cannot study and meditate, Nichiren’s asso- 
ciation of ignorance with the age (mappo) should also be noted, as it 
becomes increasingly important in his later thought. 
Third, “ignorant persons” are equated with the laity. This view 
appears in Nichiren’s pre-Sado letter to his monk-disciple Sanmi-bd, 
also quoted above: 
What should always be upon one’s lips is Namu-myoho-renge-kyo. 
What should always reside within one’s heart is the contemplation 
of the single thought-moment comprising three thousand realms. 
This is the practice and understanding of wise persons. As for the 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 147 
lay persons of Japan, one should just have them chant Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo exclusively.!% 
Fourth—and this is the understanding that dominates the Nichi- 
ren corpus—“ignorant persons” are taken to mean all those born into 
the present, Final Dharma age, for whom chanting the daimoku is the 
sole authentic path of liberation. We find this especially in Nichi- 
ren’s writings from the period of the Sado exile (1271-1274) on, for 
example, in a famous passage from his major work Kanjin honzon sho 
(1273): 
For the sake of those ignorant of the single thought-moment com- 
prising three thousand realms, the Buddha, arousing great com- 
passion, wrapped up this gem within the five characters [of the dai- 
moku} and hung it around the necks of the immature beings of the 
last age. 104 
In Nichiren’s later thought, all lesser distinctions of literate and 
uneducated, clergy and laity, are dissolved in this category of univer- 
sal “ignorance.” For him, the Final Dharma age meant a time when 
no distinctions in the form of practice should exist: “everyone, 
whether wise or foolish, should alike abandon other practices and 
chant Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.”!% 
These four conceptions of “ignorance” can be readily summed up 
in two: literal “ignorance,” as some tangible limitation on certain 
individuals’ ability to carry out traditional Buddhist disciplines, 
whether stemming from illiteracy, an inability to meditate, or lay 
status; and metaphorical “ignorance,” or the benighted condition of 
living in the Final Dharma age, an existential problem in which all 
were implicated. 
Working from Nichiren’s extant letters, Takagi Yutaka has com- 
piled information about the social composition of the early Nichiren 
community, both monks and laity, and found that Nichiren’s lay 
followers of whom we have knowledge were chiefly samurai, both 
direct vassals of the bakufu (gokenin) and their retainers, and in- 
cluded several bakufu-appointed estate stewards (jito). Others were 
local landholders engaged in farming (myoshu) and women of a class 
to have servants.!°%© These people appear to have represented a range 
of reading ability; Nichiren wrote of one devout woman that she 
“could not read a single sentence,”!”” while a few others at the oppo- 
site end of the spectrum were versed in literary Chinese. Most seem 
to have been literate at least to some degree, and Nichiren encour- 
aged those who were capable of so doing to recite portions of the 
Lotus Sutra as an auxiliary to the daimoku—a practice he himself con- 
ducted.!°8 However, Nichiren’s letters do not give us a complete pic- 

148 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
ture of his immediate community of disciples. His lay followers 
would have included not only the people to whom the letters were 
addressed but many of their retainers, relatives, servants, and others 
who composed their households. In addition, not all of Nichiren’s 
letters have survived, and there were lay followers of whom we know 
almost nothing." Among all these people, it is likely that some 
could not read, and even those whose could read the Japanese sylla- 
bary or prose written in the mixed Japanese and Chinese style (kana 
majiri bun) might have been unable to read the text of the Lotus 
Sutra. The simple practice of chanting the daimoku would have amply 
answered the religious needs of such devotees. 
Nevertheless, as Takagi’s findings demonstrate, Nichiren’s lay fol- 
lowers of whom we have knowledge were not drawn from the lowest 
stratum of medieval society, and many were in fact literate. Thus the 
“ignorant person who cannot distinguish even a single character” 
may have represented not only any actual unlettered devotees who 
had to be instructed, but also a symbolic extreme case whose salva- 
tion would guarantee the salvation of all. 
As a simple practice suited to “ignorant persons,” in both literal 
and metaphoric senses, the daimoku exhibits continuities not only 
with those Heian-period setsuwa that mention the daimoku in connec- 
tion with persons of limited understanding, but also with the prac- 
tice of invoking Amida’s name. In particular, in the claim that merely 
chanting the title of the Lotus Sutra with faith enables all persons 
equally to attain buddhahood in the Final Dharma age, we find a 
parallel to Honen’s exclusive nembutsu. Both the chanted nembutsu 
and Nichiren’s daimoku were no doubt advocated at least in part for 
the sake of uneducated common people, and, as simple alternatives 
to less accessible forms such as meditation or sutra recitation, served 
to make Buddhist practice available to a wider range of people. In 
addition, over time, the doctrine that liberation depended only on a 
simple act available to anyone would prove subversive of the clerical- 
lay hierarchy and of monasticism itself, helping to open the way for a 
strongly lay-oriented Buddhism in Japan. Nevertheless, in both Pure 
Land and Nichiren traditions of the Kamakura period, emphasis on 
a simple, exclusive religious act was not solely a matter of making 
Buddhist practice available to those of limited education. It was also 
linked to awareness of the degenerate age and its unique soteriologi- 
cal demands. The claim that the daimoku constituted the sole, abso- 
lute form of practice, universally valid and not accommodated to 
individual capacity for understanding, must have conveyed to those 
who embraced it a certainty about their personal liberation at a time 
when liberation was thought to be especially difficult to achieve. If 
everyone, even the most ignorant person, could be saved, one’s own 
salvation could not be in doubt. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 149 
Nichiren Buddhist Innovations in Daimoku Practice 
Lastly we will mention three innovations in uses of the daimoku 
practice within the Nichiren tradition that appeared during or after 
Nichiren’s lifetime. These are a concept of the daimoku as an esoteric 
mantra for realizing union with the originally enlightened cosmic 
Buddha, the use of the daimoku as a memorial prayer, and icono- 
graphic representations of the daimoku. 
THE DAIMOKU AS ESOTERIC MANTRA 
Shingon esoteric Buddhism reveres the cosmic Buddha Dainichi 
(Skt. Mahavairocana), whose body is said to be composed of the five 
universal elements of earth, water, fire, wind, and space. The same 
five elements also compose the bodies of all beings. Through the 
performance of the three mysteries—the forming of mudras or sym- 
bolic gestures with the hands or body, the chanting of mantras or 
sacred syllables with the mouth, and the meditation on sacred man- 
dalas with the mind—the practitioner is said to realize the identity of 
her or his own person with the cosmic Buddha. 
Esoteric Tendai Buddhism, which developed under the influence 
of Shingon practice, also had its primordial or originally enlight- 
ened cosmic Buddha, identified in this case with the eternal Sakya- 
muni Buddha described in the “Fathoming the Lifespan of the Tatha- 
gata” chapter of the Lotus Sutra. Medieval Tendai texts typically refer 
to this Buddha as “the unproduced triple-bodied tathagata’ (musa 
sanjin no nyorai), meaning that he possesses inherently the three 
bodies of a buddha: the manifested body (Jpn. ojin; Skt. nirmana- 
kaya), the physical body with which the Buddha appears in this world 
to save the beings; the recompense body (Jpn. hojin; Skt. sambhoga- 
kaya), or the wisdom that the Buddha has attained, conceived of asa 
“body”; and the Dharma body (Jpn. hosshin; Skt. dharmakaya), the 
Buddha as personification of ultimate truth. Like Shingon’s Daini- 
chi, the unproduced triple-bodied Buddha was regarded as transtem- 
poral, without beginning or end, immanent in all things and identi- 
fied with the cosmos itself. 
One document in the Nichiren corpus suggests the daimoku to be 
a mantra or bia (seed word) associated with this primordial Buddha. 
This is a record of secretly transmitted oral teachings on the Lotus 
Sutra attributed to Nichiren—almost certainly the work of later disci- 
ples—that describe this Buddha using the esoteric Sanskrit terms 
samayas (the mudras or hand gestures associated with the various dei- 
ties or the implements, e.g., vajras, swords, etc. with which they are 
iconographically depicted) and bijas, (the Sanskrit letters symboliz- 
ing particular buddhas or bodhisattvas) : 

150 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
The august form [of this Buddha] is the originally inherent forms 
and aspects of the ten realms [of living beings]. His samayas are 
what [these beings of] the ten realms hold. His bya is the single 
word “faith,” that is, Namu-myoho-renge-kyo just as it is. [Again, ] 
his samaya is the palms placed together [as in chanting the dav- 
moku]. Keep this secret! !1° 
Also under Shingon esoteric influence, Japanese Tendai began to 
associate the five characters of the Lotus Sutraé title with the five uni- 
versal elements comprising the body of the primordially enlightened 
Buddha, thus stressing that buddhahood is originally inherent in all 
things. Because of the difficulty of dating medieval Tendai texts, it is 
difficult at present to judge even approximately when this associa- 
tion began. It appears, for example, in the Hokke kan’yo ryaku chu 
shuku,""! an apocryphal work of indeterminate date attributed to Sai- 
cho. It also appears in certain of the problematic writings in the 
Nichiren corpus—for example, 
the five elements are earth, water, fire, wind, and space... . In the 
present [Lotus] sutra, they are opened and explained as the five 
aspects of the buddha nature and the seeds of the five wisdom 
buddhas inherent in the minds of all living beings. They are in fact 
the five characters myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo. These five characters form the 
substance of the human body. Inherent and constantly abiding, 
they are the tathagata of original enlightenment.!!” 
Carrying this discourse one step further, we find that at least one 
text in the corpus of works attributed to Nichiren recommends 
chanting the daimoku as a practice for realizing one’s identity with 
the cosmic Buddha. This text is a (some scholars say apocryphal!!8) 
letter from Nichiren to a follower named Abutsu-bo living on Sado 
Island where Nichiren had been exiled. Abutsu-bo had evidently 
asked for an explanation of the magnificent jeweled stupa of the 
Tathagata Prabhutaratna (Many Jewels) that emerges from beneath 
the earth in the eleventh chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The reply, given 
in part below, identifies the stupa with the daimoku, Myoho-renge- 
kyo, and describes chanting the daimoku as a practice for realizing 
that one is enlightened originally, that is, identical to the primordial 
Buddha: 
Now the single body of Abutsu Shonin consists of the five ele- 
ments of earth, water, fire, wind, and space. These five elements 
are the five characters of the daimoku. This being the case, Abutsu- 
bo is himself the jeweled stupa and the jeweled stupa is itself 
Abutsu-bo. Any other understanding would be profitless. .. . You 
may think you made offerings to the jeweled stupa of the Tatha- 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 151 
gata Many Jewels but that is not so; you offered them to yourself. 
One’s own person is the tathagata of original enlightenment, pos- 
sessing three bodies in one. Believing in this way, chant Namu- 
myoho-renge-kyo. Then that place [where you do so] is the very 
place where the jeweled stupa dwells.!!4 
Nichiren Buddhist practice resembles in some respects the three 
mysteries of Shingon in greatly condensed form: one mandala—to 
be discussed below; one mantra—the daimoku; and one mudra—that 
is, the gassho gesture of the palms placed together in reverence, used 
while chanting the daimoku. Nichiren himself, as well as many of his 
contemporary and later disciples, had originally been trained in the 
esoteric Tendai tradition. Thus, despite Nichiren’s own hostility 
toward Shingon and its influence upon Tendai, it is not suprising 
that some esoteric elements should appear in Nichiren Buddhist 
thought concerning the daimoku. 
THE DAIMOKU AS MEMORIAL PRAYER 
Another development in the chanting of the daimoku to take place 
within the Nichiren community was the use of this practice for the 
enlightenment of the deceased. Several of Nichiren’s letters indi- 
cated that both he and his followers chanted the daimoku many tens 
of thousands of times along with recitation of the Lotus Sutra for the 
purpose of memorial prayers.'!® In one letter dated 1279, Nichiren 
also praises a follower who, on the thirteenth anniversary of his infant 
daughter’s death, had erected a stupa about sixteen feet high in- 
scribed with the seven characters na-mu-myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo. He urges, 
“Be sure to inscribe the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra on any other 
stupas [you may erect] from now on.”!!6 Today, in the various Nichi- 
ren denominations, the daimoku is still inscribed on wooden votive 
tablets (tba) used in memorializing the deceased. 
In this context we should also take note of the practice of inscrib- 
ing the daimoku on itabi, vertical stone tablets that were erected 
widely during the medieval period for votive purposes, most com- 
monly for the enlightenment of the deceased. /tabi were often in- 
scribed with the nembutsu, with Sanskrit letters representing various 
esoteric deities, or with the names of other buddhas or bodhisattvas. 
Among Nichiren Buddhists, they were inscribed with the daimoku. 
Some of these daimoku itabi bore only the inscription “Namu-myoho- 
renge-ky6,” while on others, this central inscription of the daimoku 
was flanked by the names of the two buddhas, Sakyamuni and Pra- 
bhitaratna, who sit side by side in the jeweled stupa in the Lotus 
Sutra. To these were sometimes added the names of Visistacaritra 

152 > JACQUELINE I. STONE 
(Superior Conduct) and the others of the four leaders of the bodhi- 
sattvas who, in the fifteenth chapter of the sutra, emerge from be- 
neath the earth and vow to spread the sutra in the evil latter age after 
Sakyamuni’s nirvana. Other daimoku itabi reproduce the entirety of 
Nichiren’s calligraphic mandala, discussed below. The oldest known 
daimoku itabi is preserved at the daibo of the Nichirenshu temple 
Honmonji in Ikegami, Tokyo. It is dated 1290, just eight years after 
Nichiren’s death. From the inscription, it seems to have been erected 
as a votive offering for the enlightenment of the donors’ deceased 
father 
We have already seen from the Shuzenji-ketsu that the daimoku was 
employed specifically as a deathbed practice. Within the Nichiren 
tradition, from Nichiren’s time on, we find it being offered for the 
well-being of the deceased. There is a commonality here in the asso- 
ciation with death, but a shift from chanting it merely for one’s own 
enlightenment after death to also offering it for the enlightenment 
of others. 
THE DAIMOKU AS MANDALA 
Nichiren was to our knowledge the first person to give the daimoku 
iconographic expression. Some of his early writings suggest that an 
inscription of the daimoku served his followers as a personal honzon 
or object of worship, such as this 1260 essay: 
Question: What should be the object of worship, comportment, 
and constant practice of those who believe in the Lotus Sutrar 
Answer: First of all, as to the object of worship, you may use the 
eight rolls of the Lotus Sutra, or a single roll, or one chapter, or you 
may inscribe the title and make it the object of worship. .. . As for 
comportment, always sit up straight before the object of worship. 
When outside the place of practice, you need not give preference 
to [any of the four postures—] walking, standing, sitting, or lying 
down. One’s constant practice should be chanting the daimoku, 
Namu-myoho-renge-kyo.!!8 
A personal letter to a lay follower dated 1264 similarly reads, “In your 
letter you say that three times each day you bow in reverence to the 
seven characters [of the daimoku],”!!* suggesting that an inscription 
of “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo” was enshrined as an object of worship. 
Such inscriptions no doubt represent the embryonic form of 
Nichiren’s calligraphic mandalas, which he began to inscribe from 
the time of the Sado exile on. This object of worship, called the 
Great Mandala (daimandara) or gohonzon, represents the Buddha 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 153 
wisdom manifested in all phenomena. Down its center are inscribed 
the seven characters na-mu-myd-ho-ren-ge-kyo. Surrounding this central 
inscription are the names of the two buddhas who figure in the Lotus 
Sutra, Sakyamuni and Prabhitaratna, together with those of great 
bodhisattvas from both this world and other worlds, as well as the 
names of disciples, gods, humans, dragon kings, demons, and hell- 
dwellers, representing the ten realms that constitute the categories 
of sentient beings. “Illuminated by the light of the five characters of 
the Wondrous Dharma, they display their originally inherent enlight- 
ened attributes,” Nichiren wrote.!2° Nichiren called this mandala, as 
he did the daimoku that it embodies, the “single thought-moment 
comprising three thousand realms as manifested in actuality” (jz no 
ichinen sanzen). By having faith in the daimoku and chanting it before 
this object of worship, he taught, one could in effect enter the 
mandala and participate in the enlightened reality that it depicts. 
Nichiren inscribed these mandalas for individual believers as a focus 
of personal faith and practice. More than 120 of them inscribed 
in his own hand survive to this day. They may also have been en- 
shrined in local Hokkedo or chapels for Lotus devotion where 
Nichiren’s followers met.!*! Nichiren also inscribed smaller versions 
of the mandala to be worn on the person as omamor or protective 
amulets.!?* 
The three aspects of daimoku practice discussed above—the dai- 
moku considered as esoteric mantra, offered as a prayer for the de- 
ceased, and embodied in Nichiren’s mandala—appear to be innova- 
tive uses of the daimoku found primarily, if not exclusively, within the 
Nichiren tradition. From another view, however, they represent the 
assimilation to the daimoku of other preexisting forms, functions, 
and interpretations of Buddhist devotion, such as the use of man- 
dalas, prayers for the deceased, and the idea of esoteric union with a 
cosmic Buddha. In this sense, they are very much connected to ear- 
lier practices. 
Conclusions: The Emergence of the Daimoku 
in Medieval Japan 
In elevating the chanting of the daimoku to the status of an exclusive 
practice, Nichiren assimilated to it all the beneficial functions that 
Buddhists of the medieval period expected their religion to per- 
form: realization of the Buddha nature, worldly protection, salvation 
of the deceased, eradication of sins, and birth in a pure land. His 
genius lay in his welding of sophisticated Tendai doctrines to this 
simple form of practice, thus making the Lotus tradition accessible to 

154 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
a broader spectrum of people. The simplicity and claim to all-inclu- 
siveness of Nichiren’s daimoku gave rise to multiple interpretations 
even in his early community, and this tendency has continued down 
to the present. Today, the chanting of the daimoku is variously re- 
garded as an expression of faith, a meditative discipline, and an offer- 
ing for the salvation of the dead. Lotus-based new religions stress its 
power for healing and producing worldly benefits and as a prayer for 
global peace, and at least one traditional Nichiren lineage—the 
Nakayama school based in Chiba—employs it as a tool for ritual 
exorcism. 
The daimoku practice of the Kamakura period—that is, the dai- 
moku of Nichiren and his early community—differed from that of 
the preceding era in its extensively elaborated doctrinal basis and in 
its claim to universal and exclusive validity. Nevertheless, it cannot be 
fully understood independently of its Heian antecedents. During the 
Heian period, as noted above, we find a widespread shift from com- 
plex to simpler forms of Buddhist practice and from ri to ji—that is, 
from introspective contemplation to practices involving recitation 
and tangible, ritual form. Among Lotus-related practices, alongside 
the traditional meditation methods of the Tendai sect, such practices 
as reading, reciting, and transcribing the sutra gained popularity. 
Short portions of the sutra additionally came to be chanted as ab- 
breviated forms of meditation, including the verse section of the 
“Fathoming the Lifespan of the Tathagata” chapter, the passage deal- 
ing with the ten suchnesses, and (as in the Shuzenji-ketsu) the daimoku 
itself. These shifts occurred for several reasons, including the influ- 
ence of esoteric Buddhism, whose practice is grounded in visual and 
vocalized forms; belief in the Final Dharma age and the perceived 
need for simple practices suited to the limited beings of that age; the 
rise of deathbed practices, which by the nature of their circumstances 
tended to be simple; and the spread of faith in the Lotus Sutra be- 
yond monks and aristocrats to a widening range of people, including 
those unable to acquire copies of or even read the sutra text or to 
devote themselves to meditative disciplines. The emergence of the 
practice of chanting the daimoku must be understood in the context 
of this larger historical process. Nichiren’s contribution was to pro- 
vide the daimoku with a highly developed doctrinal foundation and 
to advocate it as a single, exclusive practice. Though this universal, 
all-inclusive interpretation of the daimoku is unique to his teaching, 
the practice of the daimoku itself did not appear suddenly without 
antecedents, nor can it be understood solely as a popular practice 
offered to the common people. Like many aspects of Kamakura Bud- 
dhist practice, it is rooted in, and displays continuity with, an earlier 
tradition. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 155 
Notes 
1. Descriptions of this kind overlook the extent to which Buddhism 
before the Kamakura period was already reaching out beyond the aristoc- 
racy, especially through the activities of wbasoku and hijiri—general terms for 
monks and ascetics outside the officially sanctioned monastic organization 
—and also shugenja, or shamanistic practitioners associated with esoteric 
Buddhism. The elite-popular dichotomy also tends to reify the structure of 
medieval Japanese society into the extremes of “nobles” and “common 
people.” Many followers of the new Kamakura Buddhist movements—for 
example, those of Honen and Nichiren—were samurai, local landholders, 
estate stewards, and the like—that is, people who ranked at various points 
between these two poles. 
2. For the various roles and interpretations of the nembutsu, see, for 
example, Hori Ichiro, Folk Religion in Japan (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1968), pp. 83-139; and James C. Dobbins, Jodo Shinshu: Shin Buddhism 
in Medieval Japan (Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 
1989), pp. 18-19. For the reception of Honen’s nembutsu by different social 
classes, see Tamura Encho, Nihon Bukkyo shisoshi kenkyu, Jodokyo hen (Kyoto: 
Heirakuji Shoten, 1959), pp. 35-50. 
3. The phrase “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo,” as the title of the Lotus is most 
frequently chanted, and similar expressions occur in some Chinese T’ien- 
tai texts by or attributed to the T’ien-t’ai patriarchs Chih-i (538-597) and 
Chan-jan (711-782). On this, see Shimaji Daito, “Shodai shiso ni tsuite,” 
Toyo tetsugaku 29, 5 (May 1922) (reprinted in his Kyori to shiron [Tokyo: Meiji 
Shoin, 1931]), pp. 495-496); and Asai Endo, “Hokke shodai no genryu to 
tenkai,” Osaki gakuho 142 (December 1986): 6-7. “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo” 
also appears once in a striking tale from the T’ang-dynasty text Fa-hua ch’uan- 
chi, chiian 9, episode 11. This story tells of a woman who fell into hell for the 
sin of selling fish. On hearing that she had once performed the good act of 
listening to a lecture on the Lotus Sutra, Yama, the king of hell, agreed to let 
her return to the human world, but first offered her a view of the tortures 
that await evildoers in hell. On beholding their sufferings, she cried out 
“Namu-myoho-renge-kyo!” (or, in Chinese, “Na-mo miao-fa lien-hua ching!”), 
whereupon all the evildoers who heard her had their sins instantly eradi- 
cated and were at once reborn in the heavens (T. 2068.51:90b-c). Chitian 5, 
episode 19 of the same text also tells of a novice monk who escapes from 
hell by “reciting the title of the Lotus” (70a—b). However, these tales refer to 
single utterances of the daimoku, not to its repeated chanting as an estab- 
lished practice. 
4. One notable exception is that of Kitamura Sayo (1900-1967), founder 
of the new religion Tensho Kotai Jingu Kyo, who taught her followers to 
chant “Namu-myoho-renge-kyo” but claimed no particular association with 
Nichiren, Buddhism, or the Lotus Sutra. See The Prophet of Tabuse (Tabuse, 
Yamaguchi Prefecture: Tensho Kotai Jingu Kyo, 1954), pp. 63, 67, 107. 
5. This first chanting of the daimoku facing the morning sun is not men- 
tioned in Nichiren’s extant writings or in the Goden dodai of Nichido (1282- 

156 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
1341), one of his earliest biographies. However, it does appear in the Hokke 
honmonshu yoshé, an apocryphal work attributed to Nichiren that is thought 
to have been written about forty to fifty years after his death. See Rissho 
Daigaku Nichiren Kyogaku Kenkyujo, ed., Showa teihon Nichiren Shonin bun 
(Minobu-ché, Yamanaishi-ken: Minobusan Kuonji, 1952-1959; rev. 1988; 
hereafter STN), 3:2159. 
6. Hieizan Senshuin, ed., Dengyo Daishi zenshu (Tokyo: Sekai Seiten Kanko 
Kyokai, 1989; hereafter, DDZ), 5:69-138; or Tada Koryu et al., eds., Zendar 
hongaku ron, Nihon shiso taikei 9 (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1973), pp. 41-96. 
Shuzenji-ketsu is actually an inclusive title for two smaller, closely related 
works: the “Shuzenji soden shichu” (Personal Annotations on the Transmis- 
sions of Hsiu-ch’an-ssu, DDZ 5:69-90 or Tendai hongaku ron, pp. 42-53, in 
which it is called the Shuzenji-ketsu soden shiki) and the “Shuzenji soden 
nikki” (Diary of the Transmissions of Hsiu-ch’an-ssu, DDZ 5:91—138; Tendai 
hongaku ron, pp. 54-96). 
7. The four broad categories (koden shika no daiji or shika no dembo yoge) 
are the threefold contemplation in a single mind (isshin sangan), the mind 
and its objects (shinkyogi), the essence of calming and contemplation (shikan 
daishi), and the profound meaning of the Lotus Sutra (Hokke shingi). The 
three abbreviated transmissions (ryakuden sanka no dayi) are elaborations on 
the fourth of the broad categories, “the profound meaning of the Lotus 
Sutra,” and consist of the triple-bodied tathagata of the perfect teaching 
(engyo sanjin), the significance of the Land of Ever-Quiescent Light (jo 
jakkodo gi), and the causality of the Lotus (Renge inga). These seven categories 
are said to be “threefold” because they are presented in terms of the three 
aspects of teaching (kyo), practice (gyo), and realization (sho). A detailed ex- 
planation of the seven categories appears in Uesugi Bunshu, Nihon Tendai 
shi (Nagoya: Hajinkaku Shobo, 1935), pp. 599-712; a briefer account may 
be found in Shimaji Daito, Tendai kyogaku shi (Tokyo: Meiji Shoin, 1929; 
reprint, Tokyo: Ryubunkan, 1986), pp. 464-467. In English, see Tamura 
Kwansei, “Some Aspects of Oral Transmission in Japanese Tendai Bud- 
dhism,” Indogaku Bukkyogaku kenkyu 10, 2 (March 1962): 743-737. 
8. For example, the colophon to the Myoho-renge-kyo shutsuri shoji kechi- 
myaku gives the five characters myo-ho-ren-ge-kyo of the Lotus Sutra’ title—along 
with the passage from the “Skillful Means” chapter of the sutra dealing with 
the ten suchnesses and the verse section of the “Fathoming the Lifespan of 
the Tathagatha” chapter, both of which were often ritually recited—as essen- 
tials to be believed in wholeheartedly for freeing oneself from birth and 
death and attaining bodhi (DDZ 5:194), and the Shinnyo kan contains the 
expression “Namu-byodo-daie-ichijo-myoho-renge-ky6” (Namu to the one 
vehicle of [the Buddha’s] impartial great wisdom, the Sutra of the Lotus 
Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma) (Tendai hongaku ron, Nihon shiso taikei 9, 
p- 139). Such examples may possibly reflect the practice of chanting of the 
sutra’s title in one form or another but are not altogether clear. In addition, 
the Genshi kanjo shiki, a Tendai text of the Danna school describing the pro- 
ceedings for a particular ritual initiation, the genshi kanjo, explicitly says that 
in the course of the ceremony, the disciple receiving the transmission should 
be admonished to “single-mindedly chant Namu-myoho-renge-ky6,” but no 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 157 
further explanation of this practice is given (cited in Hazama Jiko, Nihon 
Bukkyo no tenkai to sono kicho, vol. 2: Chuko Nihon Tendai no kenkyu | 1948; 
reprint, Tokyo: Sanseido, 1974], p. 77). 
9. Practice at special times means formal practice in a secluded place, 
conducted for a fixed length of time and according to prescribed ritual. 
This section of the Shuzenji-kelsu suggests a period of seven, twenty-one, or a 
hundred days and gives detailed instructions for arranging the place of 
practice, enshrining objects of worship, and conducting the threefold con- 
templation. Practice at ordinary times can be performed while walking, stand- 
ing, sitting, or lying down and involves contemplation of the mind in the 
midst of daily activities, observing in accordance with the three truths that 
one’s momentary thoughts are simultaneously devoid of substance (empti- 
ness) yet arise in dependence upon conditions (provisional existence), 
exhibiting both aspects yet definable as neither (the middle). Practice for 
the time of death was intended for one’s last hours, traditionally held to be 
a moment of great soteriological importance, as right mindfulness at the 
moment of death was believed essential to achieve the Pure Land and not 
fall back into the realms of transmigration. 
10. DDZ5:74; Tendai hongaku ron, p. 46. The entire section of the Shuzenji- 
ketsu dealing with the threefold contemplation for one’s final hours, only 
part of which is quoted above, was at some point incorporated into the 
corpus of works attributed to Nichiren under the independent title Rinju 
isshin sangan and appears in the Showa teihon Nichiren Shonin ibun (STN) 3: 
2205-2206. 
11. Nevertheless, Nichiren’s letters do highly praise the manner of death 
of those among his followers who died chanting the daimoku. See “Ueno- 
dono gohenji,” STN 2:1490-1492, and “Myoho-ama gozen gohenji,” STN 2: 
1537. On Nichiren’s understanding of the moment of death, see Matsu- 
mura Jugon, “Nichiren Shonin ni okeru rinju soso gi,” Osaki Gakuho 144 
(March 1988): 1-12. 
12. DDZ5:87. This passage occurs in the second fascicle of the text, which 
is devoted to the transmission concerning “the mind and its objects” (shin- 
kyogi). This fascicle is virtually identical to another medieval Tendai writing, 
the Ichinen sanzen fukuchu attributed to Ennin (794-866) (Dainihon Bukkyo 
zensho [Tokyo: Suzuki Gakujutsu Zaidan, 1970-1973; hereafter DNBZ], 41: 
33-34). Although the origin and relation of the two texts are not clear, it has 
been thought that they circulated independently (see Ono Genmyo, ed., 
Bussho kaisetsu daijiten [Tokyo: Daito Shuppansha, 1933-—1936; rev. ed., 1964— 
1967], 1:153-154). Recently it has been suggested that the Fukuchu was orig- 
inally an independent text that at some point was incorporated into the 
Shuzenji-ketsu, possibly to expand the Shuzenji-ketsu’ rather brief discussion 
of the “mind and its objects” category (see Asai Endo, Shuzenji-ketsu, in Ten- 
dai hongaku ron, pp. 556, 561). It is included in the Dengyo Daishi zenshu ver- 
sion of the Shuzenji-ketsu, which is based on a Keicho-period (1596-1614) 
transcription that must also have contained it. It has, however, been omitted 
by editorial decision from the Nihon shiso tatkei version, which is based on 
two fifteenth-century transcriptions of the Shuzenji-ketsu in which this section 
is lacking. If the Fukuchu was originally an independent text, that would 

158 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
mean that not one but twe medieval Tendai documents are known to have 
recommended chanting the daimoku as a practice for the hour of death. 
13. DDZ 5:87-88. 
14. That is, for two hours twice a day. 
15. DDZ5:109; Tendai hongaku ron, pp. 71-72. 
16. These are the Totai renge sho (STN 3:2137) and the Juhachi enman sho, 
which speaks of the Shuzenji-ketsu as representing the “inner meaning of the 
Tendai sect” (3:2137, 2144). A third writing in the Nichiren collection, the 
“Nichinyo gozen gohenji,” mentions a transmission that Saicho received 
from Tao-sui in China, which has been thought to refer to the Shuzenji-ketsu 
(2:1377). As we shall see, however, some question exists about Nichiren’s 
authorship of these texts. The Shuzenji-ketsu is also quoted in the Onko kiki- 
gaki, a collection of oral teachings on the Lotus Sutra traditionally attributed 
to Nichiren but now generally regarded as the work of later disciples (3: 
2544). Here it is referred to as “the transmission of the profound purport” 
(genshiden). 
17. See, for example, the Nichiman sho of Sado Ajari Nichiman (1272- 
1360), Nichirenshu shugaku zensho (NSZ) 2:404; the Hokke honmon gukyo sho of 
Nichiryu (1385-1464), Nichiryu Shonin zenshu 11:5-6; and the Shinryu shoden 
sho of Nisshu (1532-1594), NSZ 10:232-233. Of these, the Shinryu shoden sho 
explicitly mentions the Shuzenji-ketsu as its source for the three abbreviated 
transmissions. 
18. Kindan Nichiren gi, Rissho University library ms. no. A05.31, maki 2, 
section 11. The modern Tendai scholar Uesugi Bunshu (1867-1936) also 
suggested that the Shuzenji-ketsu may be a forgery by Nichiren’s later disci- 
ples, though he stated this opinion only parenthetically and gave no reasons 
in support of it. See his Nihon Tendai shi, 1:505. 
19. Sange gakusoku, in Kinsei Bukkyo shusetsu (Tokyo: Koya Kokusho Kan- 
kokai, 1925), p. 27. 
20. Tendaishu koyo, Maeda Eun zenshu (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1931), 2:22. 
21. “Shodai shiso ni tsuite,” pp. 494-510. 
22. Ojo yoshu 2, chap 6. See also Allan A. Andrews, The Teachings Essential 
for Rebirth: A Study of Genshin’s “Ojo Yoshi” (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1973), 
pp. 75-86. 
23. “Nihon Tendai kyoseki no mondai,” Kyori to shiron, p. 332. Shimaji’s 
argument is based in part on the fact that the Shuzenji-ketsu is clearly drawn 
upon in the Kanko ruyu, a text attributed to Chujin (1065-1138). Subse- 
quent scholarship, however, has called Chujin’s authorship of the Kanko 
ruiyu into question; thus Shimaji’s dating of the Shuzenji-ketsu may be incor- 
rect. See Hazama Jiko, Nihon Bukkyo no kaiten to sono kicho, vol. 2: Chiko 
Nihon Tendai no kenkyu, p. 116. 
24. Shimaji Daito, “Shodai shiso ni tsuite,” pp. 500-502. 
25. In addition to Shimaji, see especially Ienaga Saburo, “Nichiren no 
shukyo no seiritsu ni kansuru shisoshiteki kdsatsu,” in his Chusei Bukkyo 
shisoshi bain (Kyoto: Hozokan, 1947; revised 1960), pp. 66-108; and Kawa- 
zoe Shoji, “Nichiren no shukyo keisei ni okeru nembutsu haigeki no igi,” 
Bukkyoshigaku 4, 3-4 (August 1955): 59-71 and 5, 1 (January 1956): 45-57. 
26. Shimaji Daito, Tendai kyogaku shi, p. 469. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 159 
27. Many works in the Nichiren corpus exhibiting the influence of Ten- 
dai original enlightenment thought (hongaku shiso) do not survive in Nichi- 
ren’s holograph, fail to appear in the earliest catalogues of his writings, or 
exhibit other textual problems, thus lending weight to Asai’s arguments that 
a number of these texts may be apocryphal. However, Asai’s attempt to use 
any reference to the Tendai original enlightenment doctrine in itself as 
grounds for questioning the authenticity of works attributed to Nichiren is 
not without problems. See Jacqueline Stone, “Some Disputed Writings in 
the Nichiren Corpus: Textual, Hermeneutical and Historical Problems” 
(Ph.D. diss., UCLA, 1990), esp. chap. 1. 
28. Nichiren Shonin kyogaku no kenkyu (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1945), p. 
190. Asai discusses the differences between the Shuzenji-ketsu and Nichiren’s 
thought concerning the daimoku on pp. 185-197. The specific response to 
Keiko, Maeda, and Shimaji appears on pp. 194-195. The entire sixth chap- 
ter of this book, pp. 182-373, develops the thesis that Nichiren’s thought 
differs essentially from that of medieval Tendai original enlightenment dis- 
course. 
29. Shigyo Kaishu, “Nichiren Shonin kyogaku no shisoshiteki kenkyu no 
ichi kosatsu: Toku ni chuko Tendai kyogaku o haikei toshite,” Osaki gakuho 
101 (July 1954): 46-49. 
30. A similar opinion had already been advanced more than a decade 
earlier by Tamamuro Taijo, in his Nihon Bukkyoshi gaisetsu (Tokyo: Risdsha, 
1940), pp. 239-244. According to Tamamuro, by the Kamakura period the 
Tendai sect found itself isolated by its elitist tendencies from the newly 
emerging warrior society, and its sphere of influence was threatened by the 
spread of Honen’s Pure Land teaching. As a survival strategy, Tamamuro 
suggested, Tendai monks deliberately incorporated more popularly accessi- 
ble elements into their sect’s teaching, forming a “new Tendai.” Tamamuro 
cites the use of the daimoku and of images representing the ten realms of 
beings described in the Shuzenji-ketsu as evidence of this trend. (Unlike Shi- 
gyo, however, Tamamuro placed the Shuzenji-ketsu in the early Kamakura 
period and felt that Nichiren had drawn on it in formulating his thought.) 
More recent scholarship suggests that the Tendai sect was by no means as 
quickly overshadowed by the new Kamakura movements as Tamamuro’s 
(and Shigyo’s) arguments suggest. Moreover, the Shuzenji-ketsu, being writ- 
ten in Buddhist literary Chinese, was clearly intended for a monastic reader- 
ship, and it is doubtful to what extent the practices it recommends can be 
seen as popular accommodations. 
31. In addition, the Shuzenji-ketsu does not apply the three aspects of 
teaching, practice, and realization to the entirety of the four broad catego- 
ries. This point has been noted by other scholars, who also, like Tamura, see 
the Shuzenji-ketsu as representing an early stage in the formulation of the 
threefold seven categories of the Eshin school. See, for example, Hazama 
Jiko, Chuko Nihon Tendai no kenkyu, pp. 115-117, and Asai Endo, Shuzenjr- 
ketsuin Tendai hongaku ron, p. 556. 
32. Tamura Yoshiro, Kamakura shin Bukkyo shiso no kenkyu (Kyoto: Heira- 
kuji Shoten, 1965), pp. 414-417; and idem, “Tendai hongaku shiso gaisetsu” 
in Tendai hongaku ron, pp. 532-534. 

160 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
33. The following summary is based on Takagi Yutaka, Heian jidai Hokke 
Bukkyoshi kenkyu (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1973), pp. 447-465. 
34. See Shioda Gisen, “Asa daimoku to ya nembutsu,” Osaki gakuho 103 
(June 1955): 64-68. 
35. Kawazoe Shoji, “Nichiren no shukyo keisei ni okeru nembutsu hai- 
geki no igi,” pt. 1, p. 63. 
36. lenaga Saburo, “Nichiren no shukyo no seiritsu ni kansuru shisoshi- 
teki kosatsu,” Chusei Bukkyo shisoshi kenkyu, pp. 93-94. 
37. While doing the final proofreading of this essay, I happened to find 
such a reference, although not in the Ojo den that Takagi studied. According 
to the court diary Chuyuki, Emperor Horikawa on his deathbed “first 
chanted the titles of the larger Hannya (Skt. Prajna) and Lotus sutras, as well 
as the august name of the venerable Fudo (Acala); then chanted the august 
names of Sakya[munil] and [A]mida and faced the West” (entry for the sev- 
enth month, nineteenth day of Kajo 2, or 1107; Zoho shiryo taisei 11:230b 
[Kyoto: Nozomigawa Shoten, 1965]). Here the daimoku, along with other 
invocations, was clearly chanted in a deathbed setting, thus lending weight 
to Takagi’s argument. 
38. Hanano Michiaki, “Nichiren kyogaku to Shuzenji-ketsu,” Toyo gakujitsu 
kenkyu 15, 5 (1976): 127-155. This article contains a near-exhaustive sum- 
mary of scholarship on the Shuzenji-ketsu. Hanano’s own estimate of the date 
of this text appears on p. 144. 
39. Ibid., p. 152-153. 
40. Takahashi Ken’yu, “Nichiren Shonin to Shuzenji-ketsu,” Nichiren kyo- 
gaku kenkyujo kiyo 5 (March 1978): 81-99. For example, Saicho sailed for 
China in the twentieth year of the Chen-yuan era by the Chinese calendar 
(the twenty-third year of Enryaku in Japan, or 804) and returned to Japan 
the following year. According to the Shuzenji-ketsu, however, he was in China 
in the twenty-fourth year of Chen-yuan. (In fact, there was no such year, as 
the era name was changed to Yung-chen in 805.) In addition, the Shuzenji- 
ketsu says that Saicho received a transmission concerning the teaching, prac- 
tice, and realization of “calming and contemplation” (shikan) on the third 
day of the sixth month, but he had in fact left China in the fifth month. This 
discrepancy in the dates of Saicho’s stay in China had already been noted by 
Shimaji Daito and other scholars. Takahashi gives a more detailed analysis 
of differences between authenticated writings of Saicho and the Shuzenji- 
ketsu and other medieval Tendai works, regarding the dates and contents of 
specific transmissions that Saicho is said to have received. 
41. Hanano Michiaki, “Nichiren no shodai shiso to Danna-ryu no kanjo 
genshi kuden,” in Nichiren Chugoku Bukkyo shiso to sono tenkai, ed. Misaki Ryo- 
shu (Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin, 1992), p. 133. 
42. To mention a few others advanced by leading scholars: Hazama Jiko 
(1895-1946), in a 1933 article reproduced in his Chuko Nihon Tendai no ken- 
kyu, p. 37, originally placed it in the late Heian period. In a later article 
(dated 1940), however, he revised this estimate, suggesting that the Shuzenji- 
ketsu had been compiled somewhere from the end of the early to the mid- 
Kamakura period (Chuko Nihon Tendai no kenkyu, p. 116). Hanano suggests 
that Hazama changed his mind under the influence of Asai Yorin (see 
Hanano Michiaki, “Nichiren kyogaku to Shuzenji-ketsu, p. 139). Shioda Gisen 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 161 
(1889-1964) placed the Shuzenji-ketsu in the late Fujiwara period, about the 
time of Chujin (1065-1138); see his “Shodai shiso no kontei to sono 
kiketsu,” Seeshin 29 (1955): 5. Okubo Rydjun (1915- ), in his “Shuzenji-ketsu o 
chushin to suru nisan no mondai,” Tendai gakuho 9 (October 1967): 7, sug- 
gests that the Shuzenji-ketsu was compiled after Nichiren had put forward his 
teaching of the daimoku. 
43. Takahashi Ken’yu, “Nichiren kyogaku to Shuzenji-ketsu,” p. 153. 
44. “Gassui gosho,” STN 1:293. For an assessment of the claim that 
Vasubandhu and Chih-i chanted the daimoku, see Asai Endo, “Hokke shédai 
no genryu to tenkai,” pp. 4-7. 
45. Ienaga, “Nichiren no shukyo no seiritsu ni kansuru_shisdshiteki 
kosatsu,” pp. 95-96. 
46. DNBZ, 68:519b. 
47. Kobayashi Yasunori, ed., Hokke hyakuza kikigakisho sosakuin (Tokyo: 
Musashino Shoin, 1975), pp. 59-61. Takagi Yutaka (Heian jidai Hokke Buk- 
kyoshi kenkyu, p. 432) has determined that this story is based on a similar 
Chinese tale in the T’ang-dynasty collection Fa-hua ch’uan chi, chiian 5, tale 
19. In the original story, the novice monk is not instructed to chant the 
daimoku before flinging himself from the cliff, but, in hell, he “recites the 
title of the Lotus” and is able to return to the human world (T. 51.2068:70a— 
b). This is one of the few references to chanting the daimoku in Chinese 
sources (see n. 3). 
48. Ibid., pp. 118-120. This lecture, appropriately, is commenting on a 
passage from the “Dharani” chapter of the Lotus Sutra, in which the Buddha 
praises ten female raksasas who have vowed to protect the sutra’s devotees, 
saying, “Well done, well done! For merely being able to protect one who 
receives and keeps the name of the Lotus [Sutra], your happiness shall be 
immeasurable” (Miao-fa lien-hua ching 7, T. 262.9:59b, 20-21). 
49. Nihon koten bungaku taikei (NKBT), 75:369. 
50. NKBT, 24:200. 
51. NKBT, 25:138. 
52. The following summary is based on Takagi Yutaka, Heian jidai Hokke 
Bukkyoshi kenkyu, pp. 430-447. 
53. “Kichijo-in Hokke-e ganmon,” Kanke bunso, no. 650, in NKBT, 72:599. 
54. Takagi has found two examples that may possibly be earlier but occur 
in texts that cannot be reliably dated. The Aji hishaku, which is attributed to 
Enchin and carries the date 858, concludes with the phrase “Namu-myoho- 
renge-kyo” (Chisho Daishi zenshu, 3:1195a). However, this work is very likely 
apocryphal, and thus its dating is uncertain. The Kachio engi says that the 
monk Shonyo, fourth abbot of the Kachiodera, in later life “had [people] 
chant ‘Namu-myoho-renge-kyo’ ... and contemplate ‘Namu-Amida-nyorai’ ” 
(DNBZ, 83:17b). The text itself says that Shonyo was born in 781, and the 
events that it describes may belong to the Jogan era (859-876). If so, this 
would represent the earliest known instance in Japan of the daimoku being 
actually chanted as a practice. However, the date of the Kachio engi, too, is 
unknown (Takagi, Heian jidai Hokke Bukkyoshi kenkyu, pp. 445-447). 
55. Shimaji Daitd, “Shodai shiso ni tsuite,” p. 497; and Tendai kyogaku shi, 
pii394. 
56. DNBZ, 41:125a. 

162 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
57. The Nembutsu hogo has, among its expressions of devotion to the trea- 
sure of the Dharma, the words “Namu-kaisan-kennichi-kaigon-kennon-issai- 
shuj6-kai-jObutsud6-by6d6-daiei-ichij6-myoho-renge-kyo” (Namu to the Sutra 
of the Lotus Blossom of the Wondrous Dharma, the impartial great wisdom 
that opens the three vehicles to reveal the one vehicle, that opens the [Bud- 
dha’s attainment in this] immediate [lifetime] to reveal [his attainment in 
the remotest] past, and that opens the path of buddhahood to all sentient 
beings) and “Namu-i- jisshi-gonkai-kenjitsu-hosshaku-kempon-ichijo-myoden” 
(Namu to the wondrous scripture of the one vehicle that opens the provi- 
sional and reveals the true, casting off [the Buddha’s] manifest traces to 
reveal his original [ground]) (DNBZ, 41:139b, 140a); and the Ichiitsu bodaige 
has “Namu-d6j6-shotoku-honchi-jinjin-ichijo-myoden” (Namu to the wondrous 
scripture of the profound single vehicle, the original ground realized at the 
place of enlightenment) (143c). Both these works are attributed to Kakuun. 
58. Shuzen koshiki, reproduced in Akamatsu Toshihide, Zoku Kamakura 
Bukkyo no kenkyu (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1966), p. 318. 
59. Takagi cites Takeuchi Rizo, ed., Hezan ibun, Kinsekibun hen (Tokyo: 
Tokyodo Shuppan, 1965), p. 90, as his source for this inscription. The in- 
scription itself is reproduced in Seki Hideo, ed., Kyozuka ibun (Tokyo: 
Tokyodo Shuppan, 1985), inscription no. 10, p. 7. 
60. Inoue Mitsusada, Nihon Jodokyo seiritsu shi no kenkyu (Tokyo: Yamakawa 
Shuppansha, 1956; rev. ed., 1975), p. 170, n. 20. 
61. Takeuchi Rizo, ed., Heian ibun, Kinsekibun hen, pp. 92-93. 
62. “Fujiwara Yorimichi no tame Shirakawa-in ni oite Daisojo o gasu 
myoson kyujusan ganmon,” in Honcho bunshu 46, Shinter zoho kokushi taikei, 
ed. Kuroita Katsumi (Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 1966), 33:191. 
63. Takeuchi Rizo, ed., Heian ibun, Kinsekibun hen, pp. 111-112. I have 
followed Takeuchi here in giving this inscription as “Namu-nyoho-myoho- 
renge-kyo.” Takagi gives it as “Namu-nyoho-renge-kyo”; one of these is prob- 
ably a misprint. The expression nyoho, “according to [prescribed] method,” 
was often prefixed to the names of sutras that had been copied according to 
ritual procedure. In the case of sutras intended for burial, it was also in- 
scribed before the name of the sutra on the sutra case and on the stone 
stupa erected above the burial mound. See Willa J. Tanabe, Paintings of the 
Lotus Sutra (New York and Tokyo: Weatherhill, 1988), p. 44. Though Takagi 
does not call this to our attention, if the monument at the JOsuiji—which is 
in Kyushu—was originally erected there, that would suggest that at a very 
early date the daimoku had already spread well beyond the radius of the 
capital. 
64. Chuyuki, in Zoho Shiryo Taisei Kankokai, ed., Zoho shiryo taisei 13 
(Kyoto: Nozomigawa Shoten, 1965), p. 80. f 
65. “Myomitsu Shonin goshosoku,” STN 2:1164. This has also been noted 
by Asai Endo, “Hokke shodai no genryu to tenkai,” p. 7. 
66. “Unkei gankyo okugaki,” Tokyo Daigaku ShiryO Hensanjo, ed., 
Komonjo jidai kagami, 3, 47: 76-78. 
67. Hobutsu shu, DNBZ, 91:63 b-c. 
68. DNBZ, 91:220c. 
69. “Matsuno-dono goke-ama gozen gohenji,” STN, 2:1630-1631. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 163 
70. Ienaga, “Nichiren no shuky6 no keisei ni kansuru_ shisdshiteki 
kosatsu,” p. 96. 
71. Takagi Yutaka, Heian Jidai Hokke Bukkyoshi kenkyu, pp. 464-465. 
72. The “Gassui gosho” names Vasubandhu and Chih-i as predecessors 
who chanted the daimoku (STN, 1:293). The Totaigi sho and the “Utsubusa 
nyobo gohenji” both name Chih-i and his teacher Hui-ssu (1:767; 2:1785); 
the Totaigi sho also names Saicho. The Sandai hiho bonjo ji names Vasuban- 
dhu, Nagarjuna, Hui-ssu, and Chih-i (2:1864). The authenticity of both the 
Totaigi sho and the Sandai hiho bonjo ji is in question. 
73. “Myomitsu Shonin goshdsoku,” STN, 2:1164. 
74. “Gassui gosho,” STN, 1:293. 
75. “Myoho-ama gozen gohenji,” STN, 2:1527. 
76. In his later years, Nichiren taught his followers to aspire not to the 
Pure Land of Amida, but to the “Pure Land of Eagle Peak” (Jpn. ryozen jodo), 
an apotheosis of Mt. Grdhrakitta where Sakyamuni Buddha is said to have 
preached the Lotus Sutra. This term also occurs in certain medieval Tendai 
texts. 
77. Kyogyosho gosho, STN, 2:1488. 
78. Kanjin honzon sho, STN, 1:711. 
79. “Shijo Kingo-dono gohenji,” STN, 1:635. 
80. According to Nichiren textual specialist Suzuki Ichijo, apocryphal 
writings attributed to Nichiren began to appear roughly a century after Nichi- 
ren’s death and were produced for only another hundred years or so there- 
after. See his Nichiren Shonin ibun no bunkengaku-teki kenkyu (Tokyo: Sankibo 
Busshorin, 1965), p. 8. 
81. Sho Hokke daimoku sho, STN, 1:202. 
82. Jissho sho, STN, 1:490. 
83. Shishin gohon sho, STN, 2:1298. 
84. This shift in thought reflects the increasing importance that the daz- 
moku assumed for Nichiren from the time of the Sado exile. His authenti- 
cated works written before then describe the merits of chanting the dazmoku 
merely in terms of enabling one to escape the lower realms of transmigra- 
tion and eventually attain birth in a pure land. While on Sado, however, he 
began to describe the daimoku as enabling the direct attainment of buddha- 
hood. On this see, for example, Asai Endo, “Nichiren no ibun to hongaku 
shiso” in Hongaku shiso no genryu to tenkai, Hokekyo kenkyu, ed. Asai Endo 
(Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1991), 11:290-292; and Marumo Ryusei, “Nichi- 
ren Shonin no daimoku ron: Sado zengo ni okeru soi ni tsuite,” Nichiren kyo- 
gaku kenkyujo kiyo 16 (March 1989): 37-44. 
85. For example, in the Kanjin honzon sho (STN, 1:719) and “Toki Nyudo- 
dono gohenji” (2:1522). For more detailed discussion of the concept of jz in 
Nichiren’s teaching, see Mochizuki Kanko, Nichiren kyogaku no kenkyu (Kyoto: 
Heirakuji Shoten, 1958), pp. 89-110, 118-122; and Asai Endo, “Ji no 
homon,” Nichiren kyogaku kenkyujo kiyo 13 (February 1986): 1-11. 
86. Issho jobutsu sho, STN, 1:42. 
87. STN, 1:44. 
88. Tamura Yoshiro includes it in a list of works from the Nichiren collec- 
tion in which, even though they date from Nichiren’s early period when his 

164 : JACQUELINE I. STONE 
writing still reflected considerable medieval Tendai influence, “original en- 
lightenment thought is excessively emphasized or overly developed.” They 
are therefore, in Tamura’s opinion, suspect (Kamakura shin Bukkyo shiso no 
kenkyu, pp. 591-592). This is not in itself a very convincing argument, as 
Tamura does not explain what would constitute “excessive emphasis” on 
original enlightenment thought in a work from Nichiren’s early years, a 
time when he drew substantially on the original enlightenment discourse. 
Nevertheless, the text does exhibit some puzzling features. Its strong Tendai 
perspective would suggest that it belongs to the early part of Nichiren’s 
career, but its claim that chanting the daimoku is the direct practice for 
attaining buddhahood does not appear in any of Nichiren’s authenticated 
works until the time of the Sado exile. It also contains a noncritical refer- 
ence to the practice of “chanting the Buddha’s name.” If this refers to the 
invocational nembutsu, it would be a rare occurrence in Nichiren’s writings 
of any period. 
89. For a discussion of this text and the argument surrounding its 
authenticity see Stone, “Some Problematic Writings in the Nichiren Corpus,” 
pp. 135-151, 157-172. 
90. STN, 3:2036-2037. 
91. “Only a Buddha and a Buddha together can fathom the true aspect of 
the dharmas, that is to say, the suchness of their characteristics, the suchness 
of their nature, the suchness of their essence, the suchness of their power, 
the suchness of their activity, the suchness of their causes, the suchness of 
their conditions, the suchness of their effects, and the suchness of their ulti- 
mate equality from beginning to end” (T. 262.9:5c). The interpretation of 
this passage in terms of the three truths derives from Chih-i, who, by trans- 
posing the punctuation of the Chinese text, construed the passage three dif- 
ferent ways to yield, respectively, the meanings of emptiness, provisional 
existence, and the middle (Fa-hua hstian4, T. 1716.33:693b, 9-26). See also 
the translation of this passage from the Fa-hua hstian-i in Paul L. Swanson, 
Foundation of Ten-t’ai Philosophy: The Flowering of the Two Truths Theory in Chi- 
nese Buddhism (Berkeley, Calif.: Asian Humanities Press, 1989), pp. 180-181. 
92. See T191146:11b79=215 
93. STN, 3:2037. The quote from the Ssu-chiao i appears at T. 1929.46: 
725b, 6-7. 
94. T. 1911.46:11b. See also Neal Donner and Daniel B. Stevenson, The 
Great Calming and Contemplation: A Study and Annotated Translation of Chih-i’s 
Mo-ho chih-kuan, Kuroda Institute Classics in East Asian Buddhism (Hono- 
lulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 1993), pp. 224-225; and Daniel B. Steven- 
son, “The Four Kinds of Samadhi in Early T’ien-t’ai Buddhism,” in Traditions 
of Meditation in Chinese Buddhism, ed. Peter N. Gregory, Kuroda Institute 
Studies in East Asian Buddhism, no. 4 (Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i 
Press, 1986), pp. 56-57. 
95. STN, 3:2038. 
96. Fa-hua ching an-lo-hsing i, T. 1926.46:700a. These two forms of Lotus 
samadhi were incorporated by Chih-i into the part-walking, part-sitting sama- 
dhi, the third of the four kinds of samadhi outlined in his Mo-ho chih-kuan. 
See also Stevenson, “The Four Kinds of Samadhi in Early T’ien-t’ai Bud- 
dhism,” pp. 67-72. 

Chanting the Lotus Sutra Title 165 
97. Engoku jitsugi sho, Nichirenshu shugaku zensho, 1:81. 
98. See the discussion of Nikkai’s thought in Watanabe Hoyo, Nichirenshu 
shingyoron no kenkyu (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1976), pp. 158-174. 
99. On this subject see Watanabe Hoyo, “Nichiren kyogaku ni okeru san- 
mai no mondai,” Nihon Bukkyo gakkai nempyo 41 (March 1976): 339-351. 
100. See, for example, Shioda Gisen, “Asa daimoku to ya nembutsu,” pp. 
66-67; and Asai Endo, “Nichiren no kyogaku to hongaku shiso,” pp. 293- 
Zon 
101. STN, 1:84-85. 
102. STN; 1:202. 
103. Jissho sho, STN, 1:490. 
104. STN, 1:720. 
105. Hoon sho, STN, 2:1248. 
106. Takagi Yutaka, Nichiren to sono montei (Tokyo: Kobundo, 1965), pp. 
67-81. 
107. “Ben-dono ama gozen gosho,” STN, 1:752. 
108. See, for example, Otani Gyoko, “Nichiren Shonin ni okeru sensho 
daimoku to yogyo no jissen: Toku ni dokuju o chushin toshite,” Indogaku buk- 
kyogaku kenkyu (March 1975): 432-434. Otani focuses on Nichiren’s writings 
from the period of his retirement on Mt. Minobu (1274-1282); an earlier 
instance of Nichiren recommending sutra recitation along with chanting 
the daimoku occurs in the “Gassui gosho,” STN, 1:290, dated 1264. 
109. One intriguing group of disciples is those for whom Nichiren in- 
scribed mandalas as objects of worship (honzon), but of whom nothing else 
is recorded. Of forty-nine lay followers known to have received mandalas 
from Nichiren, only about 10 percent additionally received letters from him 
that have survived and that give us further information about them. See 
Takagi Yutaka, Nichiren to sono montei, pp. 68, 78, n. 5. 
110. Ongi kuden, STN, 3:2672. 
DELS DDZ,.52293. 
112. Sanze shobutsu sokanmon kyoso hairyu, STN, 2:1697. 
113. For a summary of the questions surrounding its authenticity, see 
Stone, “Some Disputed Writings in the Nichiren Corpus,” p. 243. 
114. “Abutsu-bo gosho,” STN, 2:1145. One passage from the Shuzenji-ketsu 
similarly suggests that “chanting the single name myo [of Myoho-renge-kyo]” 
can serve as an esoteric practice for achieving union with Dainichi (Tendai 
hongaku ron, p. 77; DDZ, 5:115). 
115. See, for example, “Utsubusa nyobo gohenji,” STN, 2:1784; and 
“Ueno-dono haha ama gozen gohenji,” STN, 2:1810. 
116. “Nakaoki Nyudo goshosoku,” STN, 2:1718-1719. 
117. On daimoku itabi, see Ishimura Kiei, “Daimoku, myogo, jusanbutsu 
itabi,” in Itabi no sogo kenkyu, ed. Sakazume Shuichi (Tokyo: Haku Shobo, 
1983), pp. 120-129; and Chijiwa Itaru, Jtabi to sono jidai: tejika na bunkazai, 
mijika na chusei (Tokyo: Heibonsha, 1988), pp. 158-169. The description of 
the oldest known daimoku itabi appears in Chijiwa, pp. 162-165. The stone 
monument inscribed with a variant of the daimoku at the Josuiji, noted by 
Takagi and mentioned above, suggests itself as an antecedent to these medi- 
eval ttabi. 
118. Sho Hokke daimoku sho, STN 1:202. 

166 JACQUELINE I. STONE 
119. “Gassui gosho,” STN, 1:291. 
120. “Nichinyo gozen gohenji,” STN, 2:1375. For a detailed description 
of the great mandala (daimandara), see Nichirenshu Jiten Kanko Iinkai, ed., 
Nichirenshu jiten (Tokyo: Nichirenshu Shumuin, 1981), pp. 262-264. 
121. Takagi Yutaka, Nichiren to sono montei, p. 74; Watanabe Hoyo, “Dai- 
mandara to Hokkedo,” Nichiren to sono kyodan 1 (1976): 90-95. 
122. Miyazaki Eishu, Nichirenshu no kitoho (Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 
1980), p. 48. 

