CHAPTER 1
An Aristocratic Orphan
The Development of a Buddhist Prodigy
Traditional records depict Dogen as a prodigy bom into an
elite family at the beginning of the thirteenth century. Upon his
mother’s death when he was seven, while looking at the smoke
drifting from the burning incense during her funeral, Dogen found
himself deeply moved by an awareness of transiency. At the age of
twelve, he relinquished the chance offered by an adoptive father to
be trained in court society, opting instead to take the tonsure and
become ordained as a Tendai monk. This he did on Mount Hiei,
which was then the primary destination for all Buddhist seekers
from Kyoto and beyond. Once he joined the Tendai community,
however, he quickly faced a grave sense of doubt about original­
enlightenment thought—one of the main tenets of Tendai teach­
ing and a dominant force in Japanese Buddhism. In particular, he
questioned its relevance for coming to terms with the vicissitudes of
ephemeral existence that he faced as an orphan raised in an unsettled
period of Japanese history. He endured a great doubt (taigi), feeling
wary and unsettled regarding this key aspect of Mahayana Buddhist
teaching. This occurred during an era when the need for pathways
to individual salvation was being promoted by various new forms
of Japanese Buddhism that sought to address widespread personal
feelings of fragility, instability, and loss.
39

4° LIFE AND THOUGHT
This chapter examines the first of the four main periods in
Dogen’s life, the formative period (1200-1213), which is divided
into two substages of uneven length. The first phase (1200-1212)
covers Dogen’s early education, sense of despair, and initiation.
The brief second phase (1213) involves the pivotal year in which
he became disillusioned by uncertainty before leaving Mount Hiei
and soon after began discovering the Zen approach to meditation
recently introduced to Japan by Eisai.
Dogen’s Birth and Early Childhood
According to the traditional narrative, Dogen was born on the sec­
ond day of the first lunar month of the year 1200. His birthday is
now celebrated on January 26, following the modern solar calendar.
As indicated in the lineage map on page 43, he had direct ties to the
three most prestigious clans in the empire:
■ The imperial (Yamato) line, through the legacy of Emperor
Murakami, who reigned during the mid-goos. The impe­
rial lineage had dominated the entire Heian period but lost
power by the end of the twelfth century.
• The Minamoto (Genji) clan, through his father, which was
derivative of the royal family. The Minamoto members were
temporarily ascendant but in stiff competition with, and
soon to lose out to, other samurai clans for leadership of the
early Kamakura period.
• The Fujiwara clan, through his mother, which had long sup­
ported and in many ways eclipsed imperial rule through a
system of endogamy. The Fujiwaras also entered into decline,
although their prestigious members continued to maintain
considerable influence that was still being exerted in the
capital.

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 41
Despite their prominence and power, each of these families was
facing a challenging situation based on far-reaching sociopolitical
changes. Indeed, Dogen was born into a crucial turning point in
Japanese cultural history.
Dogen’s father was Michichika, a general and chancellor of the
court who hailed from the Minamoto clan. In 1192, the clan had
wrested the power of the government from the Fujiwara-backed
regency. Through his father’s lineage, it is claimed that Dogen was
also a ninth-generation descendant of Murakami, who reigned for
two decades (946-967) in the tenth century. Thus, he was distantly
related to the current sovereign, Go Fukakusa, for whom, many
years later while serving as a temple abbot, he occasionally said
prayers during sermons. When Michichika died in 1202 at the age
of fifty-four, Dogen’s foster father became Michitomo Minamoto—
supposedly an uncle, though he may have been the son of his father
and therefore Dogen’s considerably older half brother. In later years,
Dogen only acknowledged Michitomo, rather than Michichika, in a
couple of memorial sermons. This has led to speculation that Mich­
itomo was the true father, but perhaps Dogen simply remembered
him more fondly since he knew him while growing up.
Ishi, Dogen’s mother, was the offspring of Fujiwara Motofusa.
Motofusa had apparently arranged for his daughter, celebrated for
her beauty, to be wedded to the much older Michichika as a des­
perate attempt to regain prestige. He had failed in previous efforts
to broker a power-based marriage for her because of the family’s
decline. Shortly after Dogen’s birth, a physiognomist, customarily
brought along by aristocrats as a fortune-teller, looked at his face
and said to Ishi, “This son is a sagely child whose eyes have double
pupils. He definitely is a great vessel for truth. Ancient prophecies
indicate that the birth of such a child endangers the life of the
mother. When this child is in his sixth or seventh year, you will surely
die.”54 It is said that Ishi was not upset or fearful but loved her child 

42 LIFE AND THOUGHT
all the more. With Michitomo’s support, she arranged for Dogen to
learn to read Chinese classics, including Confucian and Daoist texts,
imperial chronicles, and poetry collections, as well as important
Japanese literary works. As part of her deathbed conversation, Ishi
recalled the birth-time divination and implored Dogen to join the
monkhood when he felt mature enough to undergo a conversion.
Modem historians generally agree that Dogen’s outstanding lit­
erary skills, evident in the rhetorical style of his many writings and
in his excellent calligraphy, provide confirmation of his aristocratic
education. In addition to its contribution to Buddhist thought,
the Treasury is regarded as an exemplary work of medieval Japa­
nese literature, and extant samples of Dogen’s handwriting remain
highly valued.
By virtue of his heritage, Dogen had many powerful relatives in
Kyoto’s secular and religious circles, and they would affect some
of his career choices, one way or the other, for years to come. After
he was orphaned at age seven, relatives on both the Minamoto
and Fujiwara sides offered to adopt him and provide prospects for
worldly success. Apparently, he was taken in by Motofusa’s brother,
Fujiwara Moroie (1172-1238), who lacked an heir, although some
versions of the story claim it was Motofusa himself who raised young
Dogen. In any case, he continued to study traditional Chinese and
Japanese writings. It is said that by the age of eight he could read
through the dense Indian Buddhist philosophical compendium the
Verses on theTreasury of the Dharma (Abhidharmakosa')—a scripture that
was widely studied in Sinitic editions, whether or not the usually
elite reader was being trained for a life in the monkhood.
Buddhist Renunciation
The Fujiwara family began to prepare Dogen for an important role
in court society. In 1212 they planned to celebrate a twelfth-year

DOGEN’S LINEAGES
Network of ;
Family &
Persona! \
Relations •
FUJIWARA CLAN
Rinzai Patron
Fujiwara Motofusa Kujo Michiie
(1145-1231)
Mother's Father V
Enni Ben'en
(1202-1280)
Tofukuji Abbot
• /* generations)
DARUMA SCHOOL
Ekan
Hatano Yoshishigc
(unk.) Dogen s main
Samurai Patron
Ishi
(?-1207)
Mother V
Koga Michitomo
(1171-1227)
Foster-father V
Hojo Tokiyori
(1227-1263)
Offered Patronage
Dainichi Nonin
(?-H95)
Michichika (Minamoto)
(1149-1202)
Father V
Emperor Murakami
(946-967)
DOGEN
(1200-1253)
Founder of Soto Zen
Transmitted at
Koshoji A Eiheiji
Five Main Uncages after Dogen’s Death:® remained at Eiheiji,® returned to Kyoto,
(3) Dogcn’s main Chinese disciple, ©second major Soto branch,® based in Kyushu
I .!------------r—i Giin® Gien Gikai i
Ejo
Kakuan
TEACHERS
TENDAI--------------* RINZAK
/ Ryokan Uncle v Eisai
Mt. Hiei Priest (1141-1215)
Koen Kenninji [
(1168-1235) Myozcn i
Mt. Hiei Abbot (1184-1225) •
CHINESE
CAODONG
SCHOOL
Rujing i
(1163-!227)\
Mentor :
Koin Under(1145-1216) D^e"'°
Onjoji Abbot
CHINESE
LINJI
SCHOOL
DISCIPLES
1
2^ Eiheiji Abbot
Ejo®
j (!198-1280)
1 ..........
Scnnc® (unk.)
Yokoji (Kyoto)
1
Kakushin
(1207-1298)
4* Eiheiji Abbot 3* Eiheiji Abbot Jakucn®
Gif" .... Gikai®
(unk.) (1219-1309)
(1207-1299)
Hokyoji
IDaijoji
Gasan
(1276-1366)
Mciho
(1277-1350) J
1Kcizan Jokin
----- (1264-1325)
Sojiji & Yokoji
5* Eiheiji Abbot
Giun
(1253-1333)
The familial and Buddhist lineages that influenced and succeeded Dogen.
(Image © 2020 Maria Sol Echarren and Steven Heine.)
43

44 LIFE AND THOUGHT
capping ceremony, or confirmation of adulthood. According to
traditional Japanese counting, which refers to someone as one year
old at the time of birth, this would be performed in the thirteenth
year. That occasion was to represent the gateway to making Dogen
ready for a high-level administrative position. However, he surrep­
titiously rejected this arrangement. In the spring of that year, he
decided instead to run off and enroll at Mount Hiei. He went to
the high priest Ryokan, a maternal uncle from the Fujiwara side,
who led a small cloister in the Yokawa District. Ryokan initially
rebuffed Dogen’s request to enter the cloister. Upon inquiring
whether Dogen’s choice would fulfill his family’s wishes, Dogen
replied, “When my loving mother passed away, she made a request
by saying, ‘You should go forth from household life and become a
student of the Way.’ Therefore, I do not want to be involved in the
futility of the profane world. I want to make a home-departure so
as to repay the blessings of my grandmother, aunts, and mother.”55
Shedding tears on hearing such a powerful explanation, Ryokan
permitted Dogen to enter the abbey for his preliminary studies.
A year later he took the tonsure under Koen, the Mount Hiei
abbot. The dharma name Dogen was apparently bestowed based on
a passage in the Flower Garland Sutra (Ch. Huayan jing, Jp. Keg-
onkyo) that refers to faith as the mother of the “merit of the original
Way” (dogen kudoku) that gives rise to the essential goodness of all
beings. Shortly after this, Dogen received the forty-eight bodhisat­
tva precepts (bosatsu kairitsu) that were typical of Tendai initiation
ceremonies. By not also receiving the 250 Hinayana precepts—at
the time only being offered at temples in the former capital of Nara,
to the south of Kyoto—Dogen would eventually face a problem in
trying to enter China, where both sets of precepts were required
for all incoming monks.
The Mount Hiei induction ceremony was the first of several
ordinations Dogen underwent. He later underwent additional 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 45
ones under the auspices of Myozen, representing the Oryu (Ch.
Huanglong) lineage of the Rinzai (Ch. Linji) stream of Zen, and
under Rujing of the Soto (Ch. Caodong) lineage. Fujiwara Moto-
fusa and/or Moroie were likely upset with Dogen’s secret decision
to renounce their offer of secular success. Evidence for that includes
the fact that thirty years later Motofusa’s son, Chancellor Kujo
Michiie, supported Enni Ben’en, Dogen’s Rinzai rival. When Enni
returned in 1243 from spending six years in China, a magnificent
new temple, Tofukuji, was constructed with Fujiwara backing near
Koshoji. By eclipsing the stature of Dogen’s monastery in size and
grandeur, even though Enni’s pilgrimage took place over a decade
later, this humiliation probably contributed to Dogen’s decision to
leave Kyoto that same year.
Medieval Japanese Tendai and the
Birth of Kamakura Buddhism
At the time of Dogen’s ordination on Mount Hiei, Tendai Buddhism
had long been dominant in Japan. The school had by then been in a
hegemonic position for nearly the entirety of the four hundred years
of the Heian period (794-1185), as well as the early decades of the
Kamakura period (1185-1333). Japanese Tendai began with Saicho
(767-822), who founded the sect after he returned from studying
in China in the first decade of the 800s. Known for its esoteric rit­
ualism, Japanese Tendai greatly contributed to the establishment
of Kyoto as Japan’s capital city. Sacred Tendai rites were thought
to protect Kyoto from chaos and disturbance, and they became an
important part of the city’s thriving culture. The Tendai sect often
catered to the concerns of the nobility and in turn received substan­
tial support. Priests offered ceremonies that combined the teachings
of the Lotus Sutra (considered applicable to all humans and sentient
beings) with views about tantric symbolism and its sacramental

46 LIFE AND THOUGHT
power. The increasingly important esoteric component of Japanese
Tendai was imported from diverse practices popular on the main­
land, though not from the Chinese Tiantai school itself, which was
highly doctrinal. The Tendai approach to ritualism, with its complex
social and financial connections to the Kyoto aristocracy, could
only be enacted by the most highly trained monks, and others were
excluded from participating in these ritual performances.
With the onset of the Kamakura period, various monks began
to reject the Tendai insistence on restricting access to ritual knowl­
edge only to those who occupied an inner sanctum of the school.
Such monks even began leaving the Hiei cloisters to start their own
schools, doing so despite the challenge of needing their new sects
to be sanctioned by the state. They sought to personalize religious
experience in a way that would be open to a much broader range
of social classes. These included not only the ascendant warriors
but also peasants and outcasts, and the new ways of practice were
also more gender inclusive. For example, Dogen’s congregations
encouraged the incorporation of nuns, a practice he witnessed in
China. It seems from some of his writings that several nuns were
close to him, although they were in the end considered of a lesser
status than male monastics. The Pure Land schools included female
lay practitioners and Shinran, the founder of True Pure Land (Jodo
Shin) in the early 1200s that broke off from Honen’s Pure Land
school, even got married. All legitimate seekers, including those
who lacked the credentials to joint Mount Hiei, were suddenly
being encouraged by this newly inspired set of teachers to pur­
sue spirituality. These innovators advocated the use of training
techniques, especially sitting meditation and chanting the name of
Amida Buddha, that had been incorporated into Tendai rituals but
without having much importance. Although Tendai has remained
a viable sect to this day, it never regained the level of influence it
had during the classical period.

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 47
During Dogen’s life, several new Buddhist movements emerged
and almost instantly began to prosper. These novel sects, referred
to collectively as the New Kamakura Buddhism, emphasized the
path to individual deliverance for lower classes and marginalized
groups. Dogen’s own Soto Zen school is counted among them, as
is Rinzai Zen. Both Zen groups were based largely on transplanting
Chinese contemplative practices to Japan. They emphasized the
approach of self-power (jiriki) through combining meditation with
strict monastic regulations. This combination was approached by
virtue of understanding the universality of ultimate reality. One way
Dogen phrased this was the unity of “whole-being-buddha-nature”
(shitsuu bussho), by which he meant that oneness is considered insep­
arable from a multitude of concrete individualities.
Among the other medieval schools that came to be grouped as
the New Kamakura Buddhism were Pure Land (founded by Honen),
based on chanting the name of Amida Buddha; True Pure Land
(founded by Shinran), based on giving thanks to Amida without
requiring the recitation; Momentous Pure Land (founded by Ippen),
known for ecstatic dancing to celebrate Amida; and Nichiren (so
named for the monk Nichiren), based on the doctrines and symbol­
ism of the Lotus Sutra. In contrast to the two Zen sects, all of those
devotional movements stressed the value of the other-power (tariki)
outlook, evoking the efficacy of worshipful rites, such as celebra­
tions, mantras, petitions, prayers, and visualizations. Although they
had many basic differences, the leaders of the new movements also
shared commonalities. Each initially studied but decided to aban­
don the Tendai sect to establish their own school grounded on the
selection (senjaku) of a single simple soteriological pathway. Each
sought to find and propagate a practice that would be effective for
all practitioners to attain enlightenment, regardless of age, rearing,
intelligence, or education.
Indeed, it was Dogen’s doubt about the doctrinal coherence 

48 LIFE AND THOUGHT
and soteriological effectiveness of the Tendai school that led him
to begin searching elsewhere. Despite his young age, he quickly
became convinced that the teaching of original enlightenment failed
to address his sense of urgency about the religious quest. He sought
a teaching that would address the profound uncertainties created
by the pervasive impermanence of all aspects of existence, which
Dogen experienced deeply in his personal life and which the Japa­
nese nation was then undergoing dramatically in ways that affected
all sectors of society.
Dogen’s Great Doubt
The matter of Dogen’s great doubt is summed up succinctly in the
Record of Kenzei-. “If all sentient beings possess the buddha-nature
and Tathagata exists without change [as enunciated in the Nirvana
Sutra], then why must people develop the aspiration for awakening
and vigorously engage in austerities in order to realize this truth?”56
This conundrum is also evoked in a series of questions and enigmas
posed in the opening passage of Dogen’s short essay Universal Rec­
ommendationfor Zazen (Fukanzazengi). The first main work Dogen
wrote after returning from China in 1227, it is considered a manifesto
for the practice of just sitting:
Fundamentally, the basis of the Way is thoroughly pervasive,
so how could it be contingent on practice and realization?
The vehicle of the ancestors is naturally unrestricted, then
why should we expend sustained effort? Surely whole being
is far beyond defilement, so who could believe in a method
to cultivate it? Never is the Way apart from this very place,
so what is the use of a journey to practice it? Yet, if there is a
hair’s breadth of distinction between existence and training,
this gap becomes as great as that between heaven and earth.

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 49
Once the slightest sense of liking or disliking something
arises, confusion reigns and one’s mind is hopelessly lost
in delusion.57
The classic scene of Dogen challenging his elders on the notion of
original enlightenment as depicted in the Illustrated Record of Kenzei.
As shown in the image above, the precocious Dogen, preoccu­
pied with such questions, began to challenge the senior monks on
Mount Hiei by debating the meaning of original enlightenment with
them. Despite his youth, his intelligence and resourcefulness were
evident, as he had a full set of scriptures in hand that he apparently 

5° LIFE AND THOUGHT
understood as well or better than they did. Even though he must
have appreciated the chance to debate, in the end he felt dissatisfied
by their weak responses. The elder priests apparently did not take
seriously his objections. Instead, they seemed intent on protecting
the status quo of conventional beliefs indicated in the scriptures
prized by the Tendai tradition. Since they seemed uninterested or
unable to acknowledge the individualistic imperative Dogen was
eager to highlight based on his personal experiences of imperma­
nence, the young monk must have sensed that he was not in a
context in which his spiritual growth could continue.
In the second major work written after his return from China,
“Discerning the Way,” Dogen wrote in a more positive vein about
the significance of undergoing doubt for attaining spiritual realiza­
tion. The piece is included as the first chapter in some editions of
the Treasury and is considered an ideal introduction to his oeuvre:
Although the Dharma is allotted amply to everyone, when
we have not practiced properly it does not appear, and when
we do not realize this it is not attained. Let it go and it
fills the hand—how could it ever be limited by one versus
many? Speak of it and it fills the mouth—vertically and hor­
izontally, without boundary. Buddhas, always within the
Dharma, dwelling in and maintaining it, do not have any
awareness of restrictions. Living beings, continuously within
and making use of it, also have no restrictions delimiting
their awareness.58
In several additional writings, Dogen revisited the primal ques­
tion of why, if all beings are endowed with buddha-nature, people
must undergo a training process to gain awakening. The challenge
to all practitioners, he argued, is to encounter thoroughgoingly and 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 51
penetrate fully the depth of this inquiry, thereby discovering for
oneself the challenges it poses to original-enlightenment thought.
Dogen consistently emphasized that practice does not “make” or
transform human beings into buddhas. Instead, practicing the
dharma expresses or reveals one’s enlightened nature, or manifests
the dynamic activity of spiritual illumination. Therefore, it must
be understood that it is not we, as calculative selves, who perform
practice. It is the buddha we always already are that is practicing
through each of us as an appropriate vessel. Realization in this
view makes continuous effort with neither regard for an outcome
nor anticipation of the result of accumulating merit from previous
phases of practice.
As a young teenager, however, such realizations lay in the future
for Dogen. What he knew is that he felt unsatisfied and stifled, and
he yearned to search out new relationships and sources of teaching.
As mentioned above, Dogen’s departure from Mount Hiei fit the
pattern of other founders of new Kamakura Buddhist sects, who
similarly had sharp differences with theTendai approach to training.
Each of the emerging leaders sought an alternative pathway based
on his own distinctive religious vision. However, unlike Honen,
Shinran, and Nichiren, who spent more than a decade before taking
leave of the Tendai bastion, Dogen’s initial doubt occurred after less
than two years. He made a full exit by 1217, at the latest estimation,
sensing from the outset that the doctrine of original enlightenment
was self-contradictory.
Based on his later reflections, it is clear that Dogen must have
been pondering ephemerality since the time of his mother’s death
and would not rest until its meaning was clarified and his quest
fulfilled. The first step on this path was for him to join Kenninji
temple. It was there that he first practiced zazen intensively before
traveling to China in the 1220s, where he would learn about Zen

52 LIFE AND THOUGHT
directly from the great continental teachers he had been hearing
about. We will pick up this thread of Dogen’s biography in the
next chapter.
Before moving on to the transformative period—the time from
Dogen’s midteens to his late twenties,'culminating in his crucial
realization experience in China and his return to Japan—in the
remainder of this chapter we will look at Dogen’s religious vision in
the context of the violent and disorienting era of Japanese politics
and culture in which he lived.
Dogen’s Religious Vision in Light of Kamakura Society
Dogen’s life occurred at the dawn of the Kamakura period, when
Japanese society was making a drastic transition in sociopolitical
leadership. The peaceful dominion of the Fujiwara clan, which was
linked through endogamy with the imperial family for four hundred
years during the Heian period, was coming to an end. An ascending
warrior class known as samurai (with the warlords being called
shoguns) was establishing a new style of rule, one that contrasted
strongly with the Heian model of governance by the aristocratic
regency. After centuries of patrician rule uncomplicated by battle,
political stability came to an end. Ongoing civil war occurred as
samurai factions clashed frequently. Two powerful shogunal clans—
first the Hojo family until the 1330s and then the Ashikaga clan
until the mid-i5oos—remained dominant for the next three and a
half centuries.
The Heian period had seen an efflorescence of connections
between Buddhist teachings and Japanese literary arts, and it was
a period characterized by the prestige of literature (bun) and the
rejection of martial arts (Au). The Kamakura period reversed this by
sanctioning battle, yet the new rulers did not eschew connections
to Buddhism. A number of the Hojo and, later, Ashikaga shoguns 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 53
turned to Zen meditative techniques as a compelling form of behav­
ioral discipline sustained by mindful self-control. The move from
Tendai aristocratic ritualism to Zen-inspired self-discipline attuned
to the needs of samurai practitioners shows how religious affiliations
were radically changing in conjunction with abrupt yet enduring
governmental transformations. The new leaders saw Zen as a source
of creativity for religious and literary pursuits and one that would
help them maintain a sense of prestige in the face of ongoing skepti­
cism and ridicule from the dethroned yet still forceful Fujiwara clan.
The unrest in thirteenth-centuryjapan was not limited to domestic
politics or topsy-turvy social and cultural changes. By the 1270s, the
country had also had to fend off two successive Mongol invasions. In
addition, Japanese society was greatly affected by a sequence of nat­
ural catastrophes that plagued the capital, including earthquakes,
tsunamis, tornadoes, typhoons, and resultant fires. These incidents
inspired several eminent Buddhist authors to embrace an outlook
referred to as the “contemplation of impermanence”—attaining full
comprehension of how and why ephemerality is experienced in all
aspects of daily life.59
Consider, for example, the evocation of the impact of fierce com­
bat in the epic Tale of Heike (Heike monogatari). The following passage
relates to events that took place at the beginning of the shogunal
era in the late twelfth century: “The sound of the Gion temple bell
echoes the impermanence of all things, and the color of the fragrant
flowers reveal the truth that even the prosperous must decline. The
proud do not endure for they are like a dream on a spring night;
the mighty fall in the end because they are as dust before the wind.”
Another example comes from the opening passage of An Account of
My Hut (Hojoki), a text that greatly influenced Henry David Tho­
reau’s period of reclusion at Walden pond seven centuries later.
The text was written by the prominent literary figure Chomei, who
renounced life in Kyoto to become a Pure Land eremite living in a 

54 LIFE AND THOUGHT
ten-foot Buddhist hermitage. As he famously wrote in 1212, “The
river flows ceaselessly, and its water never stays the same. The bub­
bles that float upon its pools disappear and form again, but never
last very long. It is the same with people in this world and their
residences.... Death in the morning and birth in the evening is the
way of things, which are ephemeral like foam on a stream.”
In the Japanese Buddhist world, the chaotic violence of the
Kamakura period, and the cultural emphasis on ephemerality, led
to an embrace of the theory of the deterioration of the dharma,
also known as the age of decline (mappo). This notion was linked
to an ancient Buddhist prophecy indicating that, beginning fif­
teen hundred years after the death of Shakyamuni, or around the
year 1000 c.e., common people would no longer be able to attain
enlightenment for themselves. Instead, they would need to rely
on the power of a salvific buddha or bodhisattva, such as Amida,
Kannon, Monju, or Jizo, to facilitate their awakening.
Unlike many of the era’s other sectarian founders, Dogen ada­
mantly rejected the theory of mappo. In contrast to that view, which
emphasized spiritual and moral collapse, Dogen came to adamantly
advocate the method of unwavering commitment to zazen. He held
that the practice of just sitting was an example of realizing the true
dharma (shobo) that can be attained at any time, without partiality or
lack, by virtue of making an effort by and for oneself in conjunction
with all other beings. Dogen’s practice approach thus stood in stark
contrast to the advocates of the theory of decline, who generally
advocated the path based on other-power belief in Amida. Like
them, however, Dogen affirmed that everyone, whether clever or
foolish, is capable of attaining enlightenment so long as they act
with dignity and practice with determination.
Dogen s approach required extensive periods of silent meditation
undertaken not to reach a set goal but with sitting as an end itself
that infuses all thoughts and other activities. He encouraged his 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 55
followers to cast off any unconscious concern with having a pur­
pose, since that instrumentalism would betray an ulterior motive
or underlying pragmatic intention. In his writings, he frequently
criticized examples of concentration, especially but not limited to
introspective methods propagated by the Rinzai Zen sect, that did
not live up to his ideal of purposelessness. He did not, however,
regard the method of just sitting as a solitary technique, since he
also strongly emphasized that genuine awarehess must occur in
each and every possible situation.
This implication meant that the seemingly mundane actions of
a monastic, performed throughout the year and continuing during
a full lifetime, were to be conducted with a stately demeanor emu­
lating the majestic conduct of practicing buddhas. Dogen’s view
was that authentically awakened adepts perpetually realize what
he called the one great matter (ichi daiji). This perpetual realiza­
tion entails coming to terms with the ultimate meaning of life and
death, or the arising and desistence of all elements of existence. That
insight enables the practitioner to undertake enlightened behavior
in routine affairs as well as exceptional events. “In the swift march
of ephemerality,” Dogen wrote, “birth and death are vital concerns.”
Moreover, “Just by understanding that birth-death is itself nirvana,
one neither despises birth-death [as a form of bondage] nor pursues
nirvana [as a goal]. Only then will you be able to gain freedom from
birth-death within the realm of birth-death.”60
Although he rejected the theory of decline that was so promi­
nent in the Japanese Buddhist culture of his time and in the writ­
ings of his fellow founders of new Buddhist sects, we can see in
the quotes above that Dogen nevertheless reflected the Zeitgeist of
early medieval Japan. He emphasized intensely subjective religious
experience based ori keen awareness of mortality and finitude. He
wrote compellingly of the effects of impermanence while adding
the moral imperative that seekers must be able to seize the moment

56 LIFE AND THOUGHT
(an idea often referred to in the West by the Latin phrase carpe diem)
through attentive awareness and dignified behavior. He exhorted
his followers to realize enlightenment right here and now rather
than as a remote, future-based goal:
Impermanence is swift, so negotiating life-and-death is the
great matter. For the short while you are alive, if you wish
to study or practice some activity, just practice the Buddha
Way and study the Buddha Dharma. Our life is like a dream.
Time passes swiftly. Dewlike existence easily disappears.
Since time waits for no one, strive to do good unto others
and follow the will of the Buddha as long as you are alive.61
Dogen’s imperative to undergo self-renewal in light of ephem-
erality highlights that his approach was by no means pessimistic
or life denying. Rather, he held an altogether positive outlook, as
is evident in the injunction used as the title of a waka verse: “Not a
moment is to be spent idly in the twenty-four hours of each day!”
Dogen and the Chinese Tradition
It is critical, in understanding Dogen, to examine the Japanese
political, cultural, and religious currents of his time. But it is equally
important to grasp the extent to which he was influenced by, and
saw his work as an extension of, the model of Chinese Chan. The arc
of Dogen’s religious path—facing persistent challenges to attaining
spiritual authenticity in the first half of his life and enacting effec­
tive institutional authority in the second half—is emblematic of the
pathway of classical Zen teachers as expressed in numerous Chi­
nese “transmissions of the torch” (Ch. chuandeng lu, Jp. dentoroku)
records, an important literary genre that Dogen helped introduce to
Japan. During the Tang and Song dynasties, hundreds of prominent 

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 57
masters were said to have spent a significant period (in some cases,
as much as several decades) dealing with a deep feeling of instability
concerning their capacity to attain enlightenment. These incidents
reflected an interior deficiency that was overcome by realizing that
the “gateless gate” (Ch. wumen, Jp. mumon) of true reality remains
wide open.62
These intrepid wayfarers had in most cases explored alternative
forms of B uddhism, Confucianism, or Daoism early in life, prior to
undergoing rigorous Zen training. At some turning point, they felt
hopelessly trapped, like a rat in a cage, or as confused as a dog that
cannot resist licking a bowl of hot oil. They wandered in delusion
while enduring additional psychological tests and setbacks. The
intensity of their mental conditions often manifested in physical
maladies, such as panic attacks, with symptoms resembling those of
what is today called nervous breakdown. Eventually a spontaneous
sense of revulsion regarding egotistical attachments triggered lib­
eration based on self-extrication from ignorance. This was usually
brought about by fortuitous meetings with wise teachers or auspi­
cious supernal events initiated by bodhisattvas or other ethereal
guides. These encounters enabled the seeker to realize an electri­
fying moment of awakening and, after cultivating this experience,
to become an independent leader of his or her own self-sustaining
Zen community.
Dogen was particularly fond of citing the propitious accounts
of two Tang-dynasty monks, each of whom realized enlightenment
in an instantaneous flash of spiritual awareness after years of unre­
solved confusion. One monk was Lingyun, who resolved thirty years
of unproductive training upon seeing peach trees in bloom one
day. The other was Xiangyan, who, following years of struggling
to clarify doctrine and having gone so far as to burn all his books,
had an intuitive awakening while sweeping the temple grounds
when he heard the pinging sound of a pebble striking a bamboo 

5« LIFE AND THOUGHT
tree. After experiencing seemingly innocuous, fleeting sensations
that ironically connected them with the wholeness of reality, both
Zen masters found creative ways to build large assemblies of devo­
tees to carry on the leadership of their lineages. This paradigm of
undergoing spontaneous insight following years of uncertainty was
reenacted in Dogen’s own experience of enlightenment at Mount
Tiantong, which came after years of anxiety and doubt to the point
of hopelessness.
As another example of continental influence, Dogen, once he
became a temple abbot, introduced to Japanese Buddhism the Zen
custom of the master delivering formal sermons (jodo) in a dharma
hall. Following the Chinese approach, he took a high seat on a
platform before the assembly of monks, who lined up according to
institutional seniority and ranking. These sermons usually involved
the citing and interpretating of koans, while demonstrating the
self-confidence to refashion the puzzling and paradoxical sayings of
his predecessors (and the standard commentaries on them). Dogen
often accompanied these homilies with dramatic gestures, such as
banging his foot on the floor, throwing down his staff, or waving in
the air his ceremonial fly whisk before walking away from the dais.
Such dramatic enactments were meant to encourage the assembly
members to think through their own conclusions.
Dogen often took liberty with Chinese teachings, including
a prominent injunction by Rujing that he frequently cites in his
writings. Rujing recommended that practitioners adhere solely to
just sitting as the gateway to casting off body-mind rather than per­
forming the typical Mahayana Buddhist rites of burning incense,
reverential bowing, offering repentance, or chanting scriptures.
Despite Rujing’s cautionary words, Dogen found creative ways to
incorporate almost all of these observances into the activity of his
assembly. He also placed emphasis on enacting the daily chores of
cooking rice, wearing and washing ecclesial apparel properly, clean­

AN ARISTOCRATIC ORPHAN 59
ing floors thoroughly, scrubbing one’s face and body immaculately,
and spotlessly brushing one’s teeth. He likewise recommended car­
rying out numerous supplementary responsibilities in addition to
celebrating miscellaneous weekly or monthly ceremonies as well
as anniversaries and memorials. Dogen was a subversive thinker in
many ways, but it is clear he mainly sought to develop an effective
form of monasticism true to Buddhist principles and relevant to
medieval Japanese society.
Despite certain differences in emphasis, interpretation, and form,
it is clear that Dogen intended to signal full agreement with the
essence of Rujing’s admonition. Dogen consistently highlighted
the value of purposeless zazen while deemphasizing the role of
the outer trappings of monastic endeavors. These were primarily
to be valued for their focus on interior cultivation, and thus they
could be modified based on circumstances. Moreover, he did not
endorse one of the methods rejected by Rujing, the votive recitation
of Amida Buddha’s sacred name (nenbutsu) as used in Pure Land
Buddhism. Dogen compared this technique to the useless croaking
of a frog, although there are clearly indications in his writings that
he appreciated the value of prayerful devotion. The criticism was
no doubt part of the scathing put-downs volleyed back and forth
by leaders of the new Kamakura movements, who were eager to
promulgate their own lineages in the midst of a highly competitive
religious environment. Dogen must have recognized that one of his
evangelical goals as Japan’s original Zen teacher was to win over
adherents of chanting by convincing them of the greater merits of
just-sitting practice.
To understand more clearly how Dogen integrated Chinese models
of Zen theory and practice with Japanese customs and methods,
the next chapter examines the critical thirteen or so transformative 

60 LIFE AND THOUGHT
years of his life. During this period, he quickly abandoned the Ten-
dai school to take up sitting meditation at Kenninji, Japan’s first
Zen temple, established in Kyoto by Eisai. After practicing there
for close to a decade, a period for which little is mentioned in the
traditional narrative, Dogen left with Eisai’s main disciple, Myozen,
for the continent. There he struggled mightily with doubts and
frustration for the first two years. Then, in 1225, he encountered the
ideal teacher in Rujing, attained enlightenment, and studied with
great determination under Rujing’s tutelage for two additional years
before returning to Japan to begin his teaching mission.

