McRae’s Rules of Zen Studies
1. It’s not true, and therefore it’s more important.
The contents of Zen texts should not be evaluated using a simple-
minded criterion of journalistic accuracy, that is, “Did it really happen?”
For any event or saying to have occurred would be a trivial reality in-
volving a mere handful of people at one imagined point in time, which
would be overwhelmed by the thousands of people over the centuries
who were involved in the creation of Zen legends. The mythopoeic cre-
ation of Zen literature implies the religious imagination of the Chinese
people, a phenomenon of vast scale and deep signiﬁcance.
2. Lineage assertions are as wrong as they are strong.
Statements of lineage identity and “history” were polemical tools of
self-assertion, not critical evaluations of chronological fact according
to some modern concept of historical accuracy. To the extent that any
lineage assertion is signiﬁcant, it is also a misrepresentation; lineage as-
sertions that can be shown to be historically accurate are also inevitably
inconsequential as statements of religious identity.
3. Precision implies inaccuracy.
Numbers, dates, and other details lend an air of verisimilitude to a story,
but the more they accumulate, the more we should recognize them as
literary tropes. Especially in Zen studies, greater detail is an artifact of
temporal distance, and the vagueness of earlier accounts should be com-
forting in its integrity. While we should avoid joining a misguided quest
for origins, we should also be quick to distinguish between “good data”
and ornamental ﬂuª. Even as we ponder the vectors of medieval
polemics.
xix
4. Romanticism breeds cynicism.
Storytellers inevitably create heroes and villains, and the depiction of
Zen’s early patriarchs and icons cripples our understanding of both
the Tang “golden age” and the supposedly stagnant formalism of the
Song dynasty. If one side is romanticized, the other must be viliﬁed,
and both subjects pass incognito. The collusion between Zen roman-
ticists and the apologists for Confucian triumphalism—which has
Song Neo-Confucianism climbing to glory on the back of a defeated
Buddhism—is an obstacle to the understanding of both Chan and the
Chinese civil tradition. The corollary is this: Cold realism eliminates
dismissive misapprehension.
xx MCRAE’S RULES OF ZEN STUDIES
chapter 1
Looking at Lineage
A Fresh Perspective on Chan Buddhism
How should we begin this discussion of Chan Buddhism? One device
would be to begin with a story, some striking anecdote to arouse the
reader’s curiosity. There are certainly many good possibilities within the
annals of Chan. One is the account of an earnest Chinese supplicant—
the eventual second patriarch, Huike—cutting oª his arm in order to hear
the teachings from the enigmatic Indian sage, Bodhidharma. How many
times this story must have been told in meditation halls in China and
throughout the world, in order to inspire trainees to greater eªort! Or
we could ﬁnd something a bit less gruesome—perhaps the tale about Lay-
man Pang sinking all his possessions to the bottom of a river because he
had learned the futility of chasing after worldly riches. Surely this exam-
ple of unencumbered freedom is meant to teach us a deep spiritual mes-
sage? The stock of legendary accounts that might be used, each with
slightly diªerent import, is endless. And there are other possible begin-
nings, as well. Many authors have their own favored ways of character-
izing the most essential features of Chan, presenting some short list of
features to sum up the entire tradition. Or we could avoid such bland gen-
eralization and simply celebrate the incredible creativity of the Chan tra-
dition over the centuries, its vibrancy as a religious phenomenon.
The approach adopted here—already taken by posing these very
deliberations—is to begin by asking questions, to arouse in the reader not
merely a raw curiosity but the faculties of critical interrogation as well.
Speciﬁcally, let us begin by directly considering the question of how we
should look at Chan Buddhism: What approaches should we adopt, and
which should we avoid? What forms of analysis will be fruitful, and which
would merely repeat commonly accepted stereotypes?
1
The question of how we should look at Chan Buddhism is one we
should not attempt to avoid; to simply ignore the issue and begin a recita-
tion of facts and concepts would be to make an unspoken decision, to an-
swer the question by adopting a policy of denial. But neither would it be
appropriate for me to dictate the answer in ﬂat and simple terms: as I com-
pose these lines on the outskirts of Taipei at the very end of the twenti-
eth century, and edit them in Honolulu at the beginning of the twenty-
ﬁrst, I am conscious of the incredible multivalence of cultural identity
implicit in this process of exposition, both in my own person and those
of my intended audiences. That is, in various ways and at diªerent times
I have been a scholar and practitioner, student and teacher, lover and her-
mit, and what I am about to present here I have learned through a series
of extended educational encounters in America, Japan, and Taiwan. This
text is intended for use by listeners and readers not only in China, but in
Europe, the United States, and Japan as well—so how could I possibly
presume to argue that there should be oneway to look at Chan Buddhism?
Amultiplicity of perspectives and a certain ﬂuidity of analytical typolo-
gies are givens in this postmodern world.
Deconstructing the Chan Lineage Diagram
For convenience, let me begin by deﬁning a perspective on Chan that I
wish to deconstruct and thereby avoid. I should confess that I mean only
to caricature this perspective, so that we can use the observations made
now to form a lever with which to push ourselves into a certain type of
understanding (to paraphrase the positivist philosopher John Dewey and
his student Hu Shih, who spoke of studying the past to create a lever with
which to push China into a certain sort of future). The perspective to which
I refer is the traditionalist approach depicted graphically in the lineage di-
agram presented in ﬁgure 1. Diagrams such as this are included in virtu-
ally every book on Chan that has ever been written, where they are used
as a framework for presenting a historical narrative. Instead of plunging
directly into that narrative and building upon the content of the diagram
per se, though, we should ﬁrst consider its semiotic impact as a medium
of interpretation and communication. If the medium is the message (ac-
cording to the saying popularized by Marshall McLuhan), what message
is conveyed by the structure of the diagram itself? It is often noted that
Chan claims to “not posit words” (bu li wenzi, fury ñmonji)and that it
represents a “separate transmission outside the teachings” (jiaowai bie-
2 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
zhuan, kyê ge betsuden). Almost always—as I am about to do right now—
these phrases are introduced with the ironic observation that Chan cer-
tainly does use a lot of words in describing its own teachings. We will
come back to the Chan use of language and its not “positing” of words
later, but here we can observe that the lineage diagram provides the ba-
sic model for how Chan appreciates its own historical background. That
Seven Buddhas of the Past
Uá kyamuni
Indian Patriarchs: Kás yapa (1st Indian Patriarch)
Ananda
Chinese Patriarchs: Bodhidharma (= 28th Indian and 
1st Chinese Patriarch)
Huike
Sengcan
Daoxin
(to Oxhead school)
Hongren
Huineng Shenxiu 
(Southern school) (Northern school)
Nanyue Huairang Qingyuan Xingshi
Mazu Daoyi Shitou Xiqian
Linji Yixuan Caoshan and Dongshan
[Five Houses: Linji, Caodong, Guiyang, Yunmen, and Fayan]
Dahui Zonggao Hongzhi Zhengjue
(Linji [Rinzai] school) (Caodong [S ê tê ] school)
figure 1. Lineage diagram of Chinese Chan Buddhism.
is, Chan does not deﬁne itself as being one among a number of Buddhist
schools based on a particular scripture (such as the Tiantai [Tendai] school
with its emphasis on the Lotus Sñtra,for example). Instead, Chan texts
present the school as Buddhism itself, or as thecentral teaching of Bud-
dhism, which has been transmitted from the seven Buddhas of the past
to the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs, the six Chinese patriarchs, and all
the generations of Chinese and Japanese Chan and Zen masters that fol-
low. (Bodhidharma occupies a pivotal position as both the twenty-eighth
Indian and ﬁrst Chinese patriarch.) It took several centuries for this en-
tire schema to be developed; the earliest building blocks appeared at the
very end of the seventh century, and the complete system was published
perhaps as early as 801 but certainly by the year 952.
One of the advantages of beginning by considering this lineage dia-
gram, to be sure, is that it introduces the most important players in our
story. The seven Buddhas of the past are legendary ﬁgures to whom we
need pay only scant attention; although Chan texts amplify and modify
their religious identities somewhat, for our purposes we can admit them
into evidence solely as part of the cultural repertoire Chan inherited from
the larger tradition of East Asian Mahá yá na Buddhism. Chan has its own
mythic take on Uá kyamuni, of course, quite diªerent from our own con-
ception of him as the “historical” Buddha—but this too is a subject for
another time. Nor must we pay much attention to the twenty-eight In-
dian patriarchs. The manner in which their hagiographies were explicated
is a fascinating and exceedingly complex subject of study, but we do not
have the space to consider it here.
1 On the other hand, the six Chinese
patriarchs from Bodhidharma onward, along with Huineng and Shenxiu
in the sixth generation and their several generations of disciples, will ap-
pear more often than any of the other players in this drama. (The reader
will note at once that no disciples of Shenxiu’s are listed in our lineage
diagram, which is a telling omission in itself. I consider this brieﬂy on p.
14 below.) The ﬁgures remembered as icons of the Linji (Rinzai) and
Caodong (Sê tê ) schools, whose names adorn the balance of the diagram,
are among the most important in the history of the tradition.
We can draw some important basic inferences from this transmission
diagram. First, a note on historical origins: the Chan lineage scheme is a
combined product of Indian and Chinese culture. Often authors describe
Chan as the “most Chinese” of all the Chinese Buddhist schools, and part
of what they are referring to is the Chan genealogical model. (I am par-
ticularly allergic to this rhetoric, since such expressions are generally lit-
tle more than unexplicated tautologies generated through a sense of cul-
4 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
tural chauvinism rather than real analytical insight. And the fact that D.T.
Suzuki and others say virtually the same thing with regard to Japanese
Zen, that it represents somehow the essence of Japaneseculture, should
alert us to both the essential vacuity and the strategic intentions of such
sentiments.)
2 Actually, the origins of this lineage-based transmission
scheme are to be found in Indian Buddhism and the fourth- and ﬁfth-
century Buddhist meditation tradition of Kashmir. There are a number
of parallels between the Chan transmission scheme and Chinese family
genealogies of the eighth century and later, but we should remember that
Indian Buddhists had parents and teachers, family genealogies and initi-
ation lineages, just as the Chinese did.
3 As an amalgamation of Indian
and Chinese elements, though, the Chinese Chan transmission schema
developed within the Chinese Buddhist context and was particularly well
adapted to that milieu. Just as DengXiaoping talked about “socialism with
Chinese characteristics,” we could refer to the Chinese Chan transmission
model as a “Buddhist genealogical theory with Chinese characteristics.”
Second, by using the lineage diagram to deﬁne Chan as a “separate
transmission outside the teachings,” the advocates of Chan were declar-
ing their school to be profoundly diªerent from, and fundamentally bet-
ter than, all other Buddhist schools: where the other schools represented
only interpretations of Buddhism, Chan constitutes the real thing, Bud-
dhism itself. This is a polemical move, meant to establish the superiority
of Chan over all other schools. Other East Asian Buddhist schools reacted
in part by devising their own lineage transmission schemes, and in part
by saying that Chan emphasized only one of the “three learnings” of moral-
ity, meditation, and wisdom. Whether we view medieval Chinese Bud-
dhists as concerned solely with the highest forms of wisdom or as work-
ing to obtain imperial patronage and other this-worldly beneﬁts, or
engaged in both endeavors simultaneously, at the very least they were com-
peting with their contemporaries for intellectual and cultural hegemony.
We should thus not overlook the polemical quality of the lineage theory.
Incidentally, to describe Chan Buddhism in terms of polemics and con-
testation is not to exercise any value judgment, let alone to denigrate the
tradition, but merely to recognize historical fact.
Third, what counts in the Chan transmission scheme are not the “facts”
of what happened in the lives of Uá kyamuni, Bodhidharma, Huineng, and
others, but rather how these ﬁgures were perceived in terms of Chan
mythology. This point will come up repeatedly here, and I will argue a
rather complex position: In case after case, what the texts say happened
almost certainly did notoccur, in terms of a straightforward but simple-
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 5
minded criterion of journalistic accuracy. But rather than being ﬁxated
on notions of fact and fabrication, we should notice the very dynamism
of the mythopoeic processes involved. Whether or not any anecdote ac-
tually represents the words spoken and events that occurred “accurately”
is only a historical accident, and in any case the supposedly “original”
events would have involved only a very small number of people, at most
the members of a single local community. What is of far greater conse-
quence is the process by which that anecdote was generated and circu-
lated, edited and improved, and thus transmitted throughout an entire
population of Chan practitioners and devotees, until it became part of
the ﬂuid body of legendary lore by which Chan masters came to be
identiﬁed throughout Chinese culture. This is McRae’s ﬁrst law of Zen
studies: “It’s not true, and therefore it’s more important.” This is to say
that ﬁction—actually, a diªerent sort of truth—is more important than
the simplistic criterion of the question “Did it really happen?”
4
Fourth, based on the rhetoric of sñnyatá ,or emptiness,5nothing is ac-
tually transmitted in this transmission scheme. What occurs between each
teacher and his successor is merely an approval or authorization (yinke;
inka)of the successor’s attainment of complete enlightenment.
6 This is
ﬁrst of all a doctrinal principle of Chan Buddhism itself, but we should
recognize that the most important parts of the diagram are not the sep-
arate names of individual patriarchs, but the spaces between them, the
lines that join them. That is, what is being represented is not only a se-
ries of human ﬁgures but the encounters between each ﬁgure and his im-
mediate predecessor and successor. As is frequently stressed in the texts
of Chan, there is no “thing”—such as enlightenment, the Buddha-mind,
or whatever—that is actually passed from one patriarch to the next. The
existence of such an entity would violate a fundamental Buddhist doc-
trinal theme, the denial of unchanging, substantive, and individual iden-
tity to the things and beings of this world. With regard to persons, this
doctrinal theme is called “no-self” (aná tman); with regard to all the var-
ious component elements of existence, including persons, this is called
“emptiness” (sñnyatá ).This is not a merely philosophical consideration,
but rather an existential posture with profound genealogical impact: the
focus is not on “what” is being transmitted, but on the relationship of
encounter between the Buddhas and Patriarchs. The act of transmission
thus involves not the bestowing of some “thing” from one master to the
next, but the recognition of shared spiritual maturity. It is a cosmic dance
involving a special set of partners, a relationship of encounter, a meeting
at the deepest spiritual level.
6 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
Fifth, since the enlightenment of each Buddha and Patriarch is com-
plete, there is no diªerentiation between the religious status of the In-
dian Buddhas and Patriarchs and their Chinese counterparts. This was per-
haps the most important reason why this lineage-based exposition was
attractive to medieval Chinese Buddhists, since it raised the authority of
native Chinese ﬁgures to equal those of their Indian predecessors. This is
very important in terms of the siniﬁcation of Buddhism, that is, the adap-
tation of Buddhism within Chinese culture, a subject that is vitally rele-
vant to a wide range of subjects in Chinese religions and Chinese studies
in general. At the moment, though, what I want to emphasize is the most
striking and most frequently overlooked characteristic of this diagram:
the homologizing impact of its very simple lines of succession.
By representing Chan Buddhism in terms of a straight-line succession
from the seven Buddhas of the past through the six Chinese Patriarchs,
diagrams such as this are used to simplify fantastically complicated sets
of cultural and religious phenomena. Every time a straight-line relation-
ship between two masters is posited in a lineage diagram, an entire world
of complexity, an intricate universe of human relationships and experi-
ences, is eªectively eliminated from view. Could any religious ﬁgure’s iden-
tity possibly be adequately summarized by selecting only one out of a
whole lifetime of relationships? Even a quick look at the biographies of
Chinese Chan masters shows the extent of the distortion involved: where
the sources are adequate, we sometimes see multiple awakening experi-
ences
7 catalyzed by diªerent teachers and events, yet in the lineage dia-
grams these are all reduced to single lines of transmission. The use of lin-
eage diagrams to represent the Chan tradition, then—and their use is as
old as the tradition itself, since it was by explicating genealogical speciﬁcs
that Chan generated its own identity as a speciﬁc religious movement—
is a hegemonic trope, the willful extension of one way of perceiving the
world to the exclusion of all other viewpoints. (I brieﬂy discuss the var-
ious branches and divisions of the diagram beginning on p. 9 below.)
Sixth, the “genealogical model” is important not only for the histori-
cal self-understanding of the Chan school in its transmission from Uá kya-
muni Buddha through Bodhidharma and onward, but also for the man-
ner in which it deﬁnes how Chan spiritual practice itself is carried out.
That is, in contrast to a basically Indian conception of meditation prac-
tice as an individual yogic endeavor of self-puriﬁcation and progressive
advancement toward buddhahood, the Chan genealogical model implies
that the most important aspect of spiritual cultivation takes place in the
encounterbetween teacher and student. Chan trainees still spent long hours
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 7
in the meditation hall—we can be sure of that, even though the texts of-
ten do not bother conﬁrming the fact—but the focus of Chan rhetoric
and literature is on the dialogues and exchanges between each master and
his students, or between each student destined to be a master and his var-
ious teachers. It is thus not only the Chan school’s self-understanding of
its own religious history, but the religious practice of Chan itself that is
fundamentally genealogical. By saying that Chan practice is fundamen-
tally genealogical,I mean that it is derived from a genealogically under-
stood encounter experience that is relational(involving interaction be-
tween individuals rather than being based solely on individual eªort),
generational(in that it is organized according to parent-child, or rather
teacher-student, generations), and reiterative(i.e., intended for emulation
and repetition in the lives of present and future teachers and students).
No matter what the comparison or relationship between Chinese Chan
and earlier forms of Indian Buddhist meditation practice, this particular
complex of qualities is not found in other schools or forms of Buddhist
training.
8
In the most basic historical terms, though, we should recognize that
the homologizing impact of the Chan lineage diagram represents a pro-
found distortion of the subject matter. This is McRae’s second rule of Zen
studies: “Lineage assertions are as wrong as they are strong.” In more for-
mal language, this means that lineage assertions are problematic in direct
proportion to their signiﬁcance. That is, every time we read that the mas-
ters of such-and-such a group are related to each other in a lineal succes-
sion, the statement is probably inaccurate in some sense, and the more
important it is to the religious identity of the individuals involved, the
less accurate it will be. If nothing much is made of the relationship, the
lineage assertion is more likely to be correct than if a great deal rides on
it. Almost always, of course, the ﬁgure at the end of the list, or even that
individual’s students, has the most at stake in making such assertions. And
if his religious identity must be deﬁned on the basis of a lineal succession,
if his historical status depends on being the recipient of the cumulative
charisma of one particular set of predecessors, then it always seems that
some signiﬁcant distortion of the facts has taken place. Of course, my use
of the word factsshould remind you of the ﬁrst rule, which remains rel-
evant here: The presentation of reality in lineage schema represents a cer-
tain type of myth-making, and what is not “true” per se is inevitably more
important!
Seventh, I referred above to “each teacher and hissuccessor” (see p.
6), and the gender-speciﬁc terminology is appropriate. The Chan tradi-
8 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
tion is overwhelmingly male-dominated, and the strong implications of
the term patriarchalin English (referring both to Chan ﬁgureheads and
a male-centered ideology) is entirely suitable here. Nancy Jay has analyzed
how genealogical systems tend to create justiﬁcations for removing
women from the nexus of power and fecundity,
9 and in a later chapter,
we will consider the manner in which Chan represented a way of orga-
nizing power within the Chinese Buddhist monastic establishment. There
is also, of course, a broader, gender-related issue concerning Chan as a
patriarchal ideology: to put it bluntly, Was Chan a weapon used to op-
press women within Chinese society? Alas, I cannot deliberate on this is-
sue in these pages, but when the subject comes up, scholars should cer-
tainly not shrink from it. This awareness, however, is helpful here in a
diªerent and perhaps even larger sense. I do ﬁnd it germane to deal with
the following variant of the question: Was Chan a weapon in the op-
pression of Chinese religious practitioners in general, or did it serve to
suppress certain groups of them? This is a shocking question, to be sure,
but it seems to me that any means by which knowledge is structured—
and the lineage format is certainly that—both allowsand suppressesdiªer-
ent types of perspectives. I am by no means unsympathetic to the Chan
tradition, nor to the realm of Buddhist meditation and spiritual cultiva-
tion in general, but a consideration of how the Chan school’s dominance
in Chinese Buddhism may have militated against alternative viewpoints
seems an obvious aspect of our intellectual responsibility.
At this point, you may be surprised that we have derived so many in-
ferences from one simple diagram, but we could certainly coax numer-
ous additional insights from it if space were not an issue. Let us leave fur-
ther comment on the Chan lineage diagram and the genealogical identity
of the Chan tradition until later, though, and turn instead to the reason
we began this discussion in the ﬁrst place.
Avoiding the “String of Pearls” Fallacy
The preceding observations regarding the lineage diagram are to some
extent preventive medicine, prophylaxis against a type of interpretation
to be avoided. Simply put, the message is this: To represent Chan Bud-
dhism in terms that are congruent with the lineage paradigm is to run
the risk of mere repetition, without saying anything fundamentally in-
sightful. Rather than performing legitimate analytical investigations, to
do so would be merely to recapitulate an inherited symbolic system, and
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 9
in this context one’s most cherished intellectual nuances would be noth-
ing more than trivial variations on the genealogical model. Here it is use-
ful to make a clear insider/outsider distinction: What is both expected
and natural for a religious practitioner operating withinthe Chan epis-
teme, what is necessary in order to achieve membership within the pa-
triarchal lineage, becomes intellectually debilitating for those standing,
even if only temporarily, outsidethe realm of Chan as its observers and
analysts. What from the standpoint of Chan religious practice may be
absolutely essential becomes, from the standpoint of intellectual analy-
sis, the passive submission to a hegemony, the unwitting contraction of
an intellectual pathology.
So what is it that we should not be doing? Or, to put it another way,
how can we recognize when we are falling, or in danger of falling, into
patterns that inhibit our ability to see the history of Chan in all its rich
complexity?
Seen from this perspective, the issue is really quite simple: Whenever
we pretend to explain Chan in terms of lineal successions from one great
master to another, we run the risk of committing the “string of pearls”
fallacy, in which the evolution of Chan Buddhism is described in terms
of a sequence of individual masters like pearls on a string. This is a vari-
ant of the “great man” fallacy of historical writing, in which one explains
the inevitably messy details of past realities in terms of the willful endeavors
of a limited number of heroic men. (Once again, the gender-speciﬁc ter-
minology is warranted.) To be more logically precise, it is also an exam-
ple of the fallacy of archetypes, which “consists in conceptualizing change
in terms of the re-enactment of primordial archetypes which exist out-
side of time.”
10
In terms of Zen studies, this tendency is starkly apparent in the way
Dunhuang manuscripts have been used to supplement rather than radi-
cally transform the appreciation of Chan in many writings. Atrove of cul-
tural treasures similar to the Dead Sea scrolls, the Dunhuang manuscripts
were discovered in a walled-up cave in Chinese Central Asia at the turn
of the twentieth century and then dispersed to various libraries through-
out the world. They provided a cross-section of Chan documents from
the eighth to the tenth centuries, just before the great editorial homoge-
nization of the Song dynasty took place.
11 Access to these manuscripts
has allowed scholars to explore the early phases of Chinese Chan Bud-
dhism in ways that would simply not have been possible in their absence,
and the analysis of this magniﬁcent trove has occupied the attentions of
scholars (not only in Chan, but in other ﬁelds of Buddhist and Daoist
10 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
studies, and various realms of historical and sociological research as well)
for the entire twentieth century. However, in Chan studies, evidence from
the Dunhuang manuscripts has most often been used merely to paint bet-
ter features onto the same old traditional picture, merely to add attrac-
tive detail to the genealogical model described above. Thus, scholars have
used Dunhuang manuscripts in conjunction with other evidence to de-
vise more vivid portraits of Bodhidharma, Huineng, and others as indi-
vidualﬁgures, without changing the framework in which these individ-
uals are presented in any substantial manner, and certainly without trying
to work out the cultural and religious dynamics that led to their inclu-
sion in the genealogical paradigm in the ﬁrst place. There are exceptions,
of course, but they are comparatively few and far between.
I am not suggesting that we never include descriptions of lineage suc-
cessions in our writing on Chan—far from it—but only that, when we
do so, we should be conscious of the reasons for their use and remain
aware of the risks involved. Not only would it be impossible to talk about
Chan without ever using concepts related to lineage—to the extent it can
be described as a continuous set of processes, Chan is at its most profound
level a genealogicalset of phenomena—but we will gain the greatest beneﬁt
from shifting our focus and perspective repeatedly as we move through
the evidence. To commit the “string of pearls” fallacy is to remain ﬁxed
and unaware in a single posture. Rather than simply move to a diªerent
static position, however, we should work to illuminate our subject from
a number of angles, to encounter it with diªerent aspects of our inter-
pretive capacities.
AProvisional Device: The Phases of Chan
Figure 2 (p. 13) is a simple chart describing Chan in a manner quite dif-
ferent from that of the lineage diagram (ﬁg. 1) discussed above. Where
the traditional Chan diagram lists names of individual human beings,
this chart lists named phases or trends in the evolution of Chan.
12 The
names of these phases or trends are not universally accepted in writings
about Chan, and the boundaries between them are subject to debate. I
preserve these ambiguities by not adopting this terminology and peri-
odization without question throughout these chapters; on the contrary,
we should pay close attention to the intrinsic fuzziness of the borders
between the phases named so uniquely and unambiguously here. It is in
large part through considering the failure of any margins to tightly cap-
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 11
ture these arbitrary entities that we will be able to see the utility of this
periodization.
Each of the named phases refers not to a speciﬁc set of individuals per
se (although some of the most representative ﬁgures are listed), but to a
style or conﬁguration of religious activity that is known through a vari-
ety of sources. One of the primary models by which each phase is char-
acterized is, of course, a list of teachers, known as patriarchs in the tradi-
tional lineage scheme, who function as ﬁgureheads for a certain type of
religious identity. These men (and very occasionally women) serve as ex-
emplars of enlightened behavior, whose stories are told and retold in or-
der to pattern the behavior of subsequent generations of students.
13(Even
as Chan involves the transcendence of patterned behavior in enlightened
spontaneity, this abandoning of patterning must itself be patterned in or-
der to be understood, modeled before it can be imitated, deconstructed,
and reﬁgured.) Information about these ﬁgureheads, as well as doctrinal
explanations and other types of information, was circulated both orally
and through written texts. Hence each phase of Chan can be described
in terms of multiple dimensions: its exemplary human representatives,
the geography and timing of their activities, the texts that describe their
activities and convey their teachings, and so forth. Figure 2 provides in-
formation of this sort brieﬂy in the summary for each phase.
Hence, the basic diªerence between the lineage diagram and the chart
in ﬁgure 2 is that, where the diagram tends to homologize all the indi-
vidualsrepresented as identically enlightened representatives of a single
confraternity—to enable (and simultaneously limit) the understanding of
them according to a meaningful yet unitary religious mode—the chart
seeks to distinguish qualitative diªerences along a chronological axis, to
facilitate multiple perspectives and modes of understanding. The goal of
the chart is the generation of meaningful distinctions, not the assertion
of an unbroken continuity of patriarchal authority.
You will note that the lineage diagram is not monolithically unilinear,
that there are divisions into double lines at a number of points, and that
ﬁve diªerent “houses” of Chan are speciﬁed. How can we account for
these diªerentiations, while at the same time acknowledging the “ho-
mologizing” impact of the lineage diagram and its underlying religious
assumptions? We will consider most of these examples in detail later,
but they are to a certain extent exceptions that prove the rule. It has long
been recognized that Huineng and Shenxiu, the ﬁgureheads of the so-
called Southern and Northern schools, function within traditional Chan
ideology not as two isolated individuals, but as an inextricably related
12 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
figure 2. Simpliﬁed chart of the phases of Chinese Chan.
proto-chan Bodhidharma (d. ca. 530)
ca. 500–600 Huike (ca. 485 to ca. 555 or after 574)
Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Practices
summary: Multiple locations in north China; practice based on
Buddha-nature; no known lineage theory. Known through tradi-
tional texts and a few Dunhuang documents.
early chan Hongren (601–74)
ca. 600–900 Shenxiu (606?–706), Huineng (638–713)
Shenhui (684–758)
Northern, Southern, Oxhead factions
Platform Sñtra of the Sixth Patriarch
summary: Various loosely deﬁned factions/groups, with different
approaches to “contemplation of the mind”; relationship between
this and proto-Chan unclear; lineage theories appear from 689 on 
as a unifying ideology; known through numerous Dunhuang
documents and traditional sources.
middle chan Mazu (709–88), Shitou (710–90)
ca. 750–1000 Linji (d. 867), Xuefeng Yicun (822–908)
Hongzhou and Hubei factions, antecedents of the Five Houses
Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall
summary: Emergence of“encounter dialogue” as primary mode 
of practice and discourse, recorded in colloquial form and massive
quantity in 952, and implying a genealogical model of religious culti-
vation; not present in Dunhuang documents but known through
Song dynasty texts and idealized as a golden age during Song.
song-dynasty chan Dahui (1089–1163), Hongzhi (1091–1157)
ca. 950–1300 Five Houses, Linji and Caodong schools
Blue Cliff Record
summary: Greatest ﬂourishing of Chan, which as an administrative
ideology dominated the Chinese monastic establishment; the image
ofTang-dynasty masters operating in enlightened spontaneity was
inscribed in highly ritualized Song-dynasty settings; snippets of en-
counter dialogue were collected, edited to serve as precedents of
enlightened activity, and used as topics of meditative inquiry.
note: In order to cover Chan from the end of the Song dynasty up to the present, this chart
should include at least a postclassical phase or perhaps multiple later phases. However, since the
developments of these later periods are not treated in this book, I will not attempt a periodiza-
tion here.
pair simultaneously linked in collaborative and competitive relationship.
Together they constitute a single literary and religious polarity expressed
as a relationship between two human exemplars. Aconvenient shorthand
for this complex bimodality is the French word duel,which carries the
meanings of both “duel” and “dual” in English.
14 Thus the doctrine of
sudden enlightenment associated with the Southern school cannot be ex-
plained without reference to a gradualist doctrine attributed to the North-
ern school. (This simplistic explanation of sudden versus gradual is woe-
fully inadequate in the face of historical reality, but it must have been very
effective in disabusing trainees of their simplistic notions of meditative
“achievement.”) Note that these two schools, along with Oxhead Chan,
are included together in the “early Chan” phase of the eighth century—
and this is an intentional grouping, meant to indicate that these three fac-
tions were more alike than diªerent, or at least that their religious iden-
tities were so intimately intertwined that they must be represented
together. The fact that none of Shenxiu’s disciples are included in the Chan
lineage diagram (already noticed on p. 4 above) is due to their exclusion
from consideration in traditionalistic accounts of Chan; here their mean-
ingful absence serves to highlight the unilinearity of the “orthodox” line
traced from the legendary (i.e., ﬁctional, but therefore more important)
Huineng. In chapter 6 (see p. 138) we consider whether the distinction
between the Linji/Rinzai and Caodong/Sê tê schools implies a similar po-
larity, that is, two groups paired together in a duel or binary relationship
that is both contrastive and competitive.
You might assume that the chart depicts a chain of historical causality,
but it actually characterizes the retrospective identity of the various
phases of Chan. The periodization of any set of past events represents an
act of reconstruction—not the mere reorganization and ordering of in-
formation, but the total remaking of the past as the structured image of
our imaginations. Now, there is nothing wrong with creating an image
of the past—indeed, I believe it is our task as historians, both professional
and occasional, to visualize the past in the best ways we know how. But
we should work to remain aware that the ordering of developments from
the ﬁfth through the thirteenth centuries inevitably involves this kind of
re-creation; we cannot get oª the hook with the naive belief that we are
merely ordering the information for the sake of convenience, but not re-
ally altering it in the process.
This retrospective quality pervades the Chan tradition. Time and again
we ﬁnd we are dealing, not with what happened at any given point, but
with what people thought happened previously. We deal not so much in
14 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
facts and events as in legends and reconstructions, not so much with ac-
complishments and contributions as with attributions and legacies. The
legends and reconstructions, not the supposedly “actual” events, deter-
mined later religious and social praxis. This observation may have a broad
application beyond Chinese Chan, in describing what it is that makes tra-
ditions traditions.
15 But it is certainly applicable to Chan: not true, and
therefore more important.
With these considerations in mind, then, and in order to get a better
perspective on the subjects to be covered in the remaining chapters, let
us look in somewhat greater detail at the phases listed in ﬁgure 2. At this
point I provide only a few introductory comments to help you become
oriented to the material and thus prepared for the more detailed analysis
that follows.
16
proto-chan
The designation proto-Chanrefers to the ill-deﬁned activities of a set of
practitioners surrounding Bodhidharma and Huike who were known for
their dedication to ascetic practices and meditation. Beginning roughly
around the year 500 and overlapping with the so-called early Chan phase
in the seventh and perhaps even into the eighth century, this group op-
erated in a variety of north China locations. The extent to which the in-
dividuals involved conceived of themselves as participating in a single
group or movement is unclear, and since they had no way of knowing of
the continuity of their activities with any later “Chan school,” even the
convenient term proto-Chandoes not bear close scrutiny. (Their activi-
ties are “prototypic” only to those who already know what followed.) We
know of a small number of ﬁgures who studied under Bodhidharma, and
a somewhat larger number who were primarily associated with Huike,
presumably after his master’s death. There is a certain quantity ofbiogra-
phical information about the participants in proto-Chan, and although
it attests to the variety of their backgrounds, it imparts only a shadowy
image of any shared group esprit. 
One important feature of proto-Chan—at the very least, a feature im-
portant for the subsequent evolution of the school—was its common fo-
cus on a text circulated under Bodhidharma’s name, the Treatise on the
Two Entrances and Four Practices (Erru sixing lun).As this text circulated,
practitioners who identiﬁed with Bodhidharma’s message appended their
own comments to it, making it an expanding anthology of the earliest
Chan teachings.
17Thus, while we cannot describe the scope of proto-Chan
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 15
Mount
Tài
Mount Song
(Shàolín Temple;
Shàolínsì)
Mount Zhongnán
Mount TiantáiMount
Lú
Yellow River (Huanghe)
Yángzi River (Chángjiang)
500 km0 250
Dunhuáng
Línjì
Yè
Luòyáng
Kaifeng
Cháng’an
Huángméi
Jinlíng
(Jiànyè; Nánjing)
Hóngzhou
Lín’an
(Hángzhou)
Quánzhou
Sháozhou
Cáoqi (Cáoxi)
Jiànchuan
Jingzhou
map 1. Locations for Proto-Chan, Early Chan, and Middle Chan. 
activities with any accuracy, the Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Prac-
ticesprovides insight into precisely those ideas that formed the doctrinal
nucleus of subsequent Chan practice ideology. This text describes a fun-
damental attitude of emphasis on the existence of the Buddha-nature or
potential for enlightenment within all sentient beings, as well as an atti-
tude toward how this understanding of Buddhism may be carried out in
daily life.
18
early chan
Early Chandesignates the phase when the school, or what was to become
a school eventually,19 ﬁrst articulated its lineage-based ideology in clear
and extensive form. Actually, the Dunhuang manuscripts and traditional
Chan records include an amazing variety of diªerent formulations from
this phase, and it seems evident that a great deal of experimentation was
taking place, involving a number of variations on commonly accepted
themes, as the Chan movement matured and crystallized over time. Some
of these formulations describe speciﬁc methods of contemplation prac-
tice, sometimes presented in a progressive series of steps. Others describe
the role of the Buddha-nature, or “pure mind,” within, as well as the be-
havior of the illusions—the false thoughts, or “impure mind”—that ob-
scure the appreciation of our inner purity. Compared to later Chan texts,
these formulations often seem odd but are not particularly enigmatic or
di‹cult; the emphasis at this point was on clarity in expressing this new
form of the Buddhist teaching, not on generating entirely diªerent modes
of expression.
In contrast to proto-Chan, the early Chan phase manifests a great sta-
bility of location: Daoxin and Hongren spent exactly a half-century, from
624 to 674, in the same monastic complex in Huangmei (“Yellow Plum,”
Hubei Province) and it is not unreasonable to include Shenxiu’s quarter-
century, from 675 to 701, at the not-too-distant Jade Spring Temple
(Yuquansi, in Jingzhou, which overlaps both Hubei and Hunan Prov-
inces) in this phase as well. Matters become more complex with the ex-
plosion of Chan into the two imperial capitals of Chang’an and Luoyang
during the eighth century. Therefore, whereas investigation of proto-Chan
leaves one with the impression of an indeﬁnable will-o’-the-wisp, analyz-
ing the sources for early Chan imparts a sense of continuous community
development and a growth pattern that moves from geometric increase
throughout much of the seventh century to explosive expansion in the
eighth. Also, where proto-Chan refers to a single, albeit incohesive and
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 17
ill-deﬁned, style of religiosity, early Chan may be understood as a collec-
tion of diªerent communities, groups, and factions.
In the most straightforward sense, the label East Mountain teaching
refers to both the community and doctrines of Daoxin and Hongren, but
there is an important sense in which these matters are known solely
through information transmitted by their successors. Those successors
identiﬁed themselves not as purveyors of their own doctrinal innovations,
but as transmitters of the East Mountain teaching. We need to recognize
that the ideas associated with the names Daoxin and Hongren were pri-
marily those of their followers’ later reconstruction; this recognition does
not sever the connection between those ideas and the East Mountain
teaching ﬁgureheads themselves, but it does lend an important retro-
spective quality to the process. That those successors, who were active in
Chang’an and Luoyang in the early decades of the eighth century, came
to be known by the label Northern schoolis a curious historical detail. The
Southern schoolderives from the mid-eighth-century activities of Shenhui
(684–758), although later this label came to be adopted for the Chan school
as a whole. The Oxhead schoolis a somewhat later development, a faction
or lineage that played an important historical role through its apparent
involvement in the composition of the Platform Sñtra,the hallmark and
culminating text of early Chan.
We will deal with the East Mountain teaching in chapter 2, along with
Bodhidharma and proto-Chan. The Northern, Southern, and Oxhead
schools, as the most important trends of metropolitan Chan (i.e., those
factions that evolved in the two capitals of Chang’an and Luoyang),
20will
be treated together in chapter 3. It is appropriate that the last three schools
should be taken together, since they were in dialogue with one another,
and the supposed distinctions between them in their original historical
identities are not nearly as sharp as the Chan legends would have us be-
lieve. It would also be appropriate to mark the East Mountain teaching
oª as an entirely separate phase, but I hope that adding these comments
here—and organizing chart and chapters diªerently—will be su‹cient to
show the provisional nature of the boundaries involved. The lack of con-
gruence between the categories “early Chan” and “metropolitan Chan”
as used here is intentional.
middle chan
An event of overwhelming signiﬁcance takes place in the “middle Chan”
phase: the emergence of “encounter dialogue,” the idiosyncratic manner
18 LOOKING AT LINEAGE
in which Chan masters are depicted in dialogue with their students.21As-
sociated initially with such celebrated ﬁgures as Mazu Daoyi (709–88)
and his successors Baizhang Huaihai (749–814), Nanquan Puyuan (748–
834), and Linji Yixuan (d. 867), as well as Shitou Xiqian and his succes-
sors Dongshan Liangjie (807–69) and Caoshan Benji (840–901), this is
when Chan appears to have become really Chan, when Chan masters seem
to have really behaved like Chan masters. The anecdotes of middle Chan
encounter dialogue represent the stories repeated most often in popular
books on Chan/Zen as examples of paradoxical but enlightened behav-
ior. Here the locus of religious practice was ﬁrmly removed from indi-
vidual eªort in the meditation hall and replaced by a demanding genre
of interrogation that sought to destabilize all habitual, logical patterns.
Spontaneity was the rule, iconoclastic behavior the norm.
Or so it seems. For here we will have to consider, not only the mo-
mentous import of encounter dialogue as the dominant model of reli-
gious undertaking, but also the di‹cult questions of whenall this spon-
taneous interaction was actually being practiced and whatprecisely was
going on. We will see that there is a substantial gap between when the
most famous stories of Chan lore are supposed to have happened, and
when we ﬁrst see them in written form. We will also see that these sto-
ries have complex origins, bearing features of both oral and written lit-
erature. In the past scholars (myself included) have referred to the mid-
dle phase as the “golden age” or “classical period” of Chan. The ﬁrst of
these terms may easily be discarded for its romantic coloring.
22The lat-
ter term may still be used, but only with the provision that what is be-
ing referred to is not some collection of activities and events that actu-
ally happened in the eighth through tenth centuries, but instead the
retrospective re-creation of those activities and events, the imagined iden-
tities of the magical ﬁgures of the Tang, within the minds of Song dy-
nasty Chan devotees. Mazu and the other Tang ﬁgures came to repre-
sent a classical age only when their time had passed, when their identities
were redesigned to ﬁt the needs of Song-dynasty Chan. Although mid-
dle Chan may be considered as a historical phase, “classical” Chan is it-
self a romantic depiction of activities from that phase within the later
texts of encounter dialogue. 
song-dynasty chan
The contours assumed by Chan Buddhism during the Song dynasty
represent the mature pattern which deﬁnes the tradition up until the
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 19
500 km0 250
Yellow River (Huanghe)
Yángzi River (Chángjiang)
Jin dynasty
(1115–1234)
Southern Sòng dynasty
(1127–1279)
Shu region
Jiangnánxi Dào
(Táng 618–907)
Mín (909–46)
(Southern Táng;
937–75)
î
map 2. Locations for Song-Dynasty Chan.
modern period. Using an ecological metaphor, I refer to this pattern as
a “climax paradigm,” which describes the dynamic equilibrium achieved
by a mature forest or ecological system. Earlier writers (both scholarly
and apologist) have tended to ignore this period, partly out of the wish
to explore the more “creative” masters of the Tang, or to jump across the
waters to emphasize the emerging Zen school ofJapan.The Song has also
been denigrated in general textbooks as the beginning of the decline of
Chinese Buddhism, its ossiﬁcation into institutional formalism. This at-
titude is changing, as Song-dynasty religion has become perhaps the pri-
mary focus of the study of premodern Chinese religion, by Euro-American
scholars at least. And with this change our impression of Song-dynasty
Chan has been transformed as well. It is now increasingly recognized that
the Song dynasty witnessed the emergence of a basic conﬁguration of
Chan that was disseminated throughout East Asia, and now the world.
This is apparent most dramatically in the life and teachings of Dahui Zong-
gao (1089–1163), the innovator and greatest exponent of “viewing the
critical phrase” or kê anpractice in the history of Chinese Chan. But the
picture of Song-dynasty Chan is not complete without looking closely at
the style of meditative introspection advocated by Hongzhi Zhengjue
(1091–1157) and other members of the Caodong lineage, evaluating their
recommendations on their own terms and not simply in light of the
polemical characterization by Dahui as mere “silent illumination.” Ulti-
mately, we will see that the Linji and Caodong approaches present an in-
separable pair that mimics the sudden/gradual debate of the eighth cen-
tury, and which resonates with the “two entrances” of the treatise
attributed to Bodhidharma. But this is to get ahead of our story. Let us
now turn to the legendary account of Bodhidharma himself, to see how
Chan Buddhism emerged in the ﬁrst place.
LOOKING AT LINEAGE 21
